
Some Thoughts on Mountaineering.

	Why climb mountains? This is a question which has been asked
so many times over and is one to which it is difficult to give a
satisfactory answer. The question is usually posed in such a way
that a dramatic answer is expected  but this need not necessarily
be the case: all mountaineers climb mountains for different
reasons and these reasons can change each time an ascent is
made. One reason may be the basic primeval urge to pit ones
resources against what nature has to offer but it might
frequently be an escape from one's normal environment to release
pent up pressures which demand release.

	Whatever the reason, mountains are Nature's answer to these
pressures and to involve oneself completely in their presence is
an experience from which one returns refreshed and better able
spiritually, physically and mentally to face up to life as we
experience it.

	 My own involvement goes back to childhood days when a tree
with plenty of branches presented a challenge and  small outcrops
of rock provided an outlet for youthful zeal.

	The war years afforded the opportunity to climb abroad (in
The Lebanon, Australia and New Guinea) but since then all my
climbing has been in Scotland, The Lake District, North Wales and
the Peak District.

	The late fifties marked a late and self proving era when in
company good friends I spent many weekends on the crags of
Glencoe and Ben Nevis, rock climbing in Summer and snow and ice
climbing in Winter. My companions of those happy days went onto
to greater things and tragically many are now gone having died on
he very hills they loved so much. 

	For my own part I tend to believe that one gains wisdom from
experience and tragedy. I have remained actively involved in
climbing and skiing © in my time I and have founded two
mountaineering clubs, one in Sheffield and the other in
Livingston near Edinburgh © but no longer do I have the urge to
tackle the "impossible."

	One must guard against the ever present urge to modify
difficulty. Organised society habitually seeks the smoothest way.
With mechanization and labour saving devices life has become so
smooth that some of us seek a necessary corrective in grappling
with rough undisciplined crags. For me, climbing has always
seemed to embody some immutable principles: something stable in a
changing world.

	Many people look upon mountaineering as being a dangerous
pastime and believe that its devotees take their lives in their
hands whenever they go for a climb, but the average mountaineer
probably does not incur more danger to life than a man who goes
in heartily for any one of half a dozen favourite pastimes.
Admittedly, there is an element of danger in serious climbing,
but it is or should be a calculated risk. In climbing snow or
rocks, familiarity does not breed contempt, but it does enable
one to see things in their true proportions, to appreciate real
dangers, to ignore imaginary ones, and particularly to gauge just
what one can achieve. A climber should know his limitations, how
far he can risk a move in safety: it is a test of nerve, skill,
endurance and judgement. In proportion to the large numbers of
climbers active on the hills, the loss of life by accident is
infinitesimal.

	"A man is immortal till his work is done" and if he is ready
for the call when it comes, he may just as well perish on a
mountainside as be bowled over by a car, or succumb to fatty
degeneration of the heart.

	In Ruskin's beautiful words "Mountains are the great
cathedrals of the earth, with their gates of rock, pavements of
cloud, choirs of stream and stone, altars of snow and vaults of
purple traversed by the continual stars."

Alec Barclay.
