Memorable Castle meets.
by Andy Smith

Part 1: the mid 70s.

	In the fifteen years I have been in the club, I have been on
many club  meets. Most have been enjoyable and worthwhile, but
for a variety of  reasons, some stand out as being particularly
memorable. For the  purposes of this article I will pick out a
few such highlights; this  is of course very much a personal
selection - any other club member  would no doubt have a quite
different list of memorable meets.    

29 July 1973. Froggatt.

	My first Castle meet, on my favourite local  crag. A
glorious summer Sunday - warm dry and sunny, perfect 
rockclimbing weather, and then you could enjoy rock unpolluted by 
chalk. A handful of Froggatt classics were done: Grey Slab,
Heather  Wall, Allens Slab, Green Gut, Jankers Crack and Sunset
Crack. It was  my first rock climbing for over two years, as I
had been away in the  Antarctic (surrounded by ice, with the
nearest rock more than a  hundred miles away!). Sore hands
reminded me of gritstone technique  and the necessity for
handjamming.       

24 August 1973.

	August Bank holiday, my first away meet with the club,  and
an excellent introduction. The weather was perfect, and we were 
based at the Oread Club hut at Rhyd Ddu, which has been the venue
for  so many good Snowdonia meets. A glorious day at Cwm Silin
with Geoff  Moses, Alan Fowler and Kate Peek (as she was then)
who introduced me  to one of the classic Welsh climbs - Outside
Edge on the Great Slab;  not hard technically but immensely
satisying V.Diff climbing on small  incut holds, in a superb
situation.    


24 November 1973.

	Cwm Cowarch. Gales flattened my tent and others, and  we
retreated to the hut Bryn Hafod where the rest of the club were 
staying. A group of us ventured on to the tops but one could
hardly  stand up in the wind, let alone make much progress
towards our goal of  Aran Fawddwy. We returned to the hut
battered and soaking, but were  soon revived by mugs of piping
hot gluhwein, courtesy of Dave Kime.  The next day was much
better and saw an ascent of Cader Idris. A  special significance
of the weekend for me was that I got to know a  certain young
lady who like me had recently joined the club and had  provided
Pete Mines and myself with transport for the weekend. She was 
Rosemary Perkins who ten years later was to marry me.    

26 July 1974. Glencoe.

	The scene: Crowberry Ridge Direct on the     Buachaille.
Pete Mines and I had arrived at the start of the crux  pitch -
Abraham's Traverse - and it was my turn to lead. One has to 
traverse on sloping footholds, with nothing for the hands and
then  make a tricky step up on nothing very much. The exposure is 
horrendous; the protection minimal. I was gripped but committed,
so I  did it. I think Pete had as much trouble or more following
the pitch.  Still it was good to have got a decent route done, as
it rained for  the rest of our stay.    19 August 1974. The Pass.
A superb day on Dinas Mot with Tony Holmes;  we must have been on
form - did three VSs in one day: Direct Route,  Western Slabs and
Lorraine. I found VSs hard then and still do.    

February 1975. The Ben.

	The high point of a glorious week which John  Ward, Andrew
Hothersall, John Tulley, Chris Hindley and I spent based  at the
CIC hut, a week in which we not only reached but had perfectly 
clear views from the summit on five successive days. Tower Ridge
must  be a strong contender for my personal best ever winter day
in the  hills, with the fantastic exposure of the Eastern
Traverse, which it  fell to me to lead, fully living up to its
reputation. The route was  busy and it took a rope of three, John
W, Andrew H and me, seven hours  to reach the top, just in time
to appreciate the beauty of the sunset     over the myriad peaks
out to the west. The descent via the Carn Mor  Dearg arete and
the Coire Leis abseil posts was completed by  starlight.    


27 May 1975.

	A traverse of the Cuillin Ridge, Skye, in perfect 
conditions. Justifiably considered by many to be the best
mountain  expedition in Britain. A simply unforgettable day,
described in detail  elsewhere.    28 June 1975. The Welsh 14
Peaks. Another classic, done by seven  members: John and Lesley
Evans, Sean Jennings, Andrew Hothersall, Anne  Pendlebury and me.
It was cloudy as we left Snowdon summit shortly  after 4am after
a brief bivouac, but it soon cleared as we scrambled  along Crib
Goch. The descent into Cwm Glas in the cool dawn of a  perfect
day is marked in the memory by the sight of a hot air balloon 
floating silently down the Llanberis Pass. At Ynys Ettws we
depoted  our bivvy gear and breakfasted on bacon butties provided
by our much  appreciated support party, Sue Hothersall. We were
all going well over  the Glyders, reaching Glyder Fach just
before Jack Ashcroft, the  vanguard of the Castle team doing the
traverse in the reverse  direction; Paul Goodlad, Bob Payne, Mike
Jackson, Rosy Perkins, Chris  Rowley, Dorne Sharp, and Ronnie
Hindmoor were not far behind. After     pausing on Tryfan to
stand on top of Adam and Eve, we dropped down to  Ogwen for
lunch, a most pleasant and leisurely interlude before the  slog
up Pen y'r Ole Wen at the start of the final section overt 
Carnedds. Sue joined us for this leg (as did a stray dog) and,
tired  but satisfied, we reached the last top, Foel Fras, 13
hours and 55  minutes after leaving Snowdon.                  


Part 2: the late 70s.

26 June 1976. Traverse of the Rhinogs.

	This was a day which was  memorable as much as anything for
the weather. It was one of those  days when there was thick low
cloud in the valley but the tops were  above it. Those members
who had opted to climb at Tremadoc assumed we  had been in cloud
all day. In fact it was scorching hot, and the views  as if from
an aeroplane consisted of the brightly sunlit surface of  the sea
of cloud below us with, in the distance, higher peaks like 
Snowdon and Cader raising their heads above it. We did the
traverse  from south to north, staring from Cwm Mynach, the team
being John and  Lesley Evans, Dave and Jenny Kime, Anne
Pendlebury, Rosy Perkins, Alan  Fowler, Pete Mines and myself.
Compared to Snowdonia, the Rhinog range  is refreshingly
uncrowded; apart from a school party on the top of  Rhinog Fawr,
and three or four people at the Roman Steps, we didn't  see a
soul all day. The northern section of the traverse is very rough 
and pathless, the route being intersected by curious trenches
20-30ft  deep and a few yards wide which prevent rapid progress.
At Llyn  Morwynion we all took a welcome dip in the cool water,
before  continuing over hills delighting in the names of Clip and
Moel  Ysgfarnogod - all very rough going. An intensely satisfying
walk for  which our slow time, 12 and a half hours, was largely
attributable to  the heat. Dehydration and mild sunstroke were
treated at the Pen Gwyn  Arms in Ffestiniog.    

21 April 1977.

	The first SACC fell race. 35 starters. Steve Howlands 
finished first in a time of 32 minutes, to win the individual
prize  for the Castle. The club also won the team prize. Being
somewhat green  at the fellrunning game I wore my big boots and
breeches, and finished  30th with a time of over 50 minutes; it
could only get better.    


22 April 1978.
	An excellent Langdale day, including ghyll scrambling,  hill
walking, and rockclimbing. We started up the interesting Dungeon 
Ghyll, continuing via Stickle Tarn, Pavey Ark via Jack's Rake, 
Harrison's Stickle, Pike of Stickle and so to Gimmer. The walkers
in  the party pressed on but John Turner and I could not resist
doing a  couple of the classic routes on this superb crag. First
B-route: very  exposed, and delicate in one or two places, but
mostly good protection  and good jugs. As always I tried and
failed on the notorious Amen  Corner - short and strenuous; I
just can't seem to get up it, even by  pulling on a strategically
placed runner. Second the equally enjoyable  Bracket and Slab,
and what an unusual but well named feature that  Bracket is,
which you somehow have to struggle on to the top of from  below. 

13 January 1979.

	A winter meet was held at Greg's Hut, a bothy high on  the
slopes of Cross Fell. Rosy and I, Dave and Jenny Kime and Charles 
Knowles skied up from Melmerby. After a brew and a meal at the
hut, we  were out again enjoying the perfect moonlight
conditions. We put skins  on our skis for the ascent to the
summit whence the night view  westward to the Lakeland peaks was
unforgettable, as was the moonlit  ski descent back to the hut.  

25 February 1979.

	The first of the series of successful meets based on  the
old Lochearnhead railway station. Dave Howgate, Jon Clennell and
I  had a superb day out on Ben More and Stob Binnean. A perfect
winter's  day: sunny, good views, and good cramponning snow. But
I really  remember this day for the descent in the dark to the
road. I am pretty  sure that it was Dave who suggested taking a
short cut through the  forest; this turned out to be a big
mistake. The snow was very deep  and very soft and the forest was
very dark and dense. In the end we  decided to follow a stream as
being the most certain way of ending up  at the road. We
stumbled, clambered and slithered beside, across, and  through
the burn, and at one point I found mysef sitting waist deep in 
the icy water after slipping on a verglassed stone. I don't know
how  long it took us to get through, it seemd like hours. All
good  masochistic fun, but I was wary of Dave's short cuts after
that.


Part 3: the early 80s

22 March 1980.

	An abortive attempt of the Derwent Watershed walk by  Ian
Lauriston, Frank and Jennifer Mellor, Jack Ashcroft and myself.
We  started well enough, from Mam Nick at 415am, with just enough
daylight  to move without torches. It was enjoyable walking over
Mam Tor, Lose  Hill, Win Hill, and Stanage as day dawned. However
by now the snow was  starting to get very soft, with one of those
breakable crusts which  are extremely tiring to walk on. We were
slowing up along Derwent Edge  and Ian decided to call it a day
at Back Tor; Frank and Jennifer  lasted until Margery Hill before
realising it just wasn't going to be  on to complete the walk.
That just left the stubborn members of the  team, Jack and me, to
press on over Bleaklow. Progress was slow and  tedious in the
deep soft snow which filled every grough; we weren't  making more
than about 1 mile per hour. It would have been great on  cross
country skis. A good sunset from Higher Shelf Stones; at this 
rate it was going to take another 10 hours to complete the walk.
We  had run out of food and both had to get to work the next day.
We  abandoned the attempt and dropped down to the Snake Inn to
enjoy a  beer while awaiting Rosy's rescue service.    

25 May 1980. The club's spring bank holiday meet to Skye.

	The venue  was Coruisk, and it had been an unforgettable
experience coming into  Loch Scavaig on the boat from Elgol,
unloading our supplies, including  of course beer for the week,
and making camp in the very heart of the  Cuillins. We, ie Frank
and Jennifer Mellor, Rosy and I, set out on the  Dubh Slabs - a
Skye classic, though less frequently done than the  Glenbrittle
routes on account of its innaccessibility from any road.  It give
wonderful scrambling up 2000ft of slabs, the angle and the 
gabbro friction being such that a rope is unnecessary except for
one  rather exciting abseil from Sgurr Dudh Beag, a peak on the
ridge  leading from the top of the slabs to the Main Cuillin
ridge. Ohter  memories of the week are an excellent day on Clach
Glas and Blaven,  returning to camp via the 'Bad Step', an
unexpected hail and snow  storm on Sgurr Thearlaich, climbing the
Inaccessible Pinnacle with  both Rosy and Jennifer tied on to the
rope behind me, and Jennifer  having a lucky escape when she
tripped and fell some way down a steep  corrie which we were
descending.    18 April 1981. Easter in the Cairngorms. There was
hardly any snow,  which had two advantages: the place was not
swarming with skiiers, and  we were able to go rockclimbing.
Frank and Jennifer Mellor, Ian  Lauriston, Dave Dunk, and I
greatly enjoyed Savage Slit; a very  pleasant route: sound rock
(if a little cold on this occasion),  exposed, in a superb
situation, and with good protection. The crux was  steep
strenuous and slightly awkward but well protected. When we 
reached the top we sunbathed while eating our lunch and admiring
the  views. The next day we bicycled up Gleann Einich to do
Braeriach and  Cairn Toul.    

27 June 1981.

	This was a day spent climbing with Marian Birkett on 
Scafell Crag - what a place, redolent of climbing history with
such  named features as Keswick Brothers Climb, Slingsby's
Chimney,  Hopkinson's Cairn, The Waiting Room, The Oval, Pisgah.
I was going  really well and climbing as usual in boots and
rucksack. We did  Jones's Route and Moss Gyll Grooves, both top
quality classic route,  the latter being beautiful steep slab
climbing. As befits such a day,  we finished by walking up to the
summit of Scafell Pike; and were  rewarded by a fine panorama of
Lakeland, with the Isle of Man and the  Galloway hills visible in
the distance. The following day, by  contrast, Marian, John
Turner and I climbed Piers Gill, a wet bit of  fun just right for
such a hot day, on the way up to Lingmell.    

10 January 1982.

	An extremely cold though clear and sunny day. Jack 
Ashcroft, Frank and Jennifer Mellor and I had spent the night at
the  New Inn, Marsden, after walking from Honley railway station,
and we  were joined after breakfast by the rest of the party: Ian
Lauriston,  Neil Hawksworth, Charles Knowles and Tony Parkin, for
the walk across  Black Hill, Bleaklow and Kinder to Edale. It
remained bitterly cold  all day but the conditions underfoot were
ideal (except to the totally  dedicated bogtrotter) ie frozen
iron hard. This enabled rapid progress  to be made it did not
seem long before we were dropping down an icy  Grindsbrook and
piling into Edale cafe to sit steamily swilling mugs  of tea
until the Sheffield train was due.    

2 May 1982. May day holiday in Llanberis Pass.

	A large Castle party  consisting of Frank and Jennifer
Mellor, Hilary Maslen, Charles  Knowles, Ian Lauriston, Roger
Wheatley, Andrew Ellis, Dave Kime and  Rory Williams, and I, did
a scramble called Llechog in Cwm Glas Bach.  We found this a
pleasant enough route and initially the weather was  fine, but
soon the rain and wind began and wet rock necessitated the  use
of the rope in places. When we reached the top of the route and 
pulled over the lip of the cwm we realised the full intensity of
the  gale that had blown up. We beat a retreat down the track to
Llanberis,  and arrived back at the campsite to a scene of
devastation, with tents  flooded and collapsed. Thus the meet was
rained off, with Frank once  more vowing not to come to Wales
again as it always rained.    

24 June 1982.

	It was the June Glencoe meet which had been very popular 
for several years previously but in 1982, for various reasons,
hardly  anyone could attend, and only Mike and John Jackson,
Jimmy Thompson  and I were there. We had a fantastic day in
Knoydart, starting with an  ascent of Sgurr na Ciche from Glen
Dessary. At first there was thick  mist in the glen but we were
mostly above it, and it soon cleared. The  ridge walking was
grand, and the mountain scenery magnificent, though  the weather
was conducive to reclining in the heather in the warm  sunshine;
at one point we dozed off for half an hour or so. Anyway we 
completed the ridge, knocking off a few munros in the process,
and  eventually returned to the car 13 hours after leaving it. We
got to  Spean Bridge Hotel in time for a pint, just! 

30 May1983. 

The Club was in Torridon for Spring Bank Holiday and 
besides the Torridan 'musts", Alligin, Liathach and Eighe, the 
proceedings included a mass assault on Cioch Nose of Sgurr a' 
Chaorachain, near Applecross, a 450ft V Diff 'Classic Rock' route
and  deservedly so. We were five ropes of two: Martin Whitaker
and Steve  Ralph, Frank and Jennifer Mellor, Rosie and I, Dave
Dunk and Charles  Knowles, Marian Birkett and Hilary Maslen. The
route was exhilarating:  one or two awkward moves but "all there"
- excellent well protected  climbing. After reaching the top of
the climb, there was an  interesting serrated ridge to traverse
to get to the summit of the  mountain.                   


4: the mid 80s
8 April 1984.

	A rather pleasant walk across the Dark Peak from  Bradfield
to Hayfield over Derwent Edge and Kinder, completed by Frank  and
Jennifer Mellor, Dave and Jenny Kime, Jack Ashcroft, Ben Hodges, 
Katherine Church and me. The day was however chiefly memorable
for the  SNAFU at the end of the walk, where the carefully
planned logistics  called for catching a bus to New Mills and a
train back to Sheffield.  As we approached Hayfield we realised
that catching the bus would be  touch and go; we had spent just
too long eating those ice creams at  Fairholmes. I arrived at the
bus stop first, and as some of the others  appeared I went back
to round up the stragglers. To cut a long story  short, after
much chasing each other round the streets of Hayfield,  everyone
caught the bus except Ben and me. So unlucky.    

5 May 1984.

	For me this was a perfect mountain day. The club was based 
at Gatesgarth, and a group of us climbed on Grey Crag, in
Birkness  Combe. I was climbing on that occasion with Marian
Birkett. It was a  warm, windless, if slightly hazy day, and the
climbs: Fortiter, Mitre  Buttress, Oxford and Cambridge Direct
were delightful. Graded V Diff  to Severe, they were exposed and
challenging without being gripping;  delicate or strenuous in
places, yet well protected. Utterly enjoyable  and yet far away
from the crowds who, perhaps repelled by the 90  minute hike up
into the combe, flock to Shepherd's instead. In  traditional
style we finished the day by walking up to the top of High 
Stile, returning to camp via High Crag and Scarth Gap. The drinks 
later at the Fish Inn went down well!    

30 June 1984.

	Another day out rock climbing with Marian Birkett, but  this
time a rather more difficult objective: Mur y Niwl on Craig yr 
Ysfa. It was during a club meet to Capel Curig. I let Marian lead
but  when we got to the second pitch, a traverse of the extremely
steep and  exposed wall, I began to wonder if this was entirely
wise. The crux of  the pitch was a delicate reverse mantelshelf
in the middle. The gully  bed far below dropped away steeply and
the exposure was horrendous.  The leader can protect the move
well with a runner above, but the  second has to remove this
before following. To make matters worse, all  the pro that Marian
had put in between the move and her stance (where  the guidebook
notes that the belay is poor) had pulled out when she  took the
rope in, so a fall would have resulted in a long and  spectacular
pendulum. After much hesitation I couldn't face the  reverse
mantleshelf move and overcame the problem by a handtraverse 
instead. The next pitch also involved a hand traverse, so with
the  more than vertical if short top crack, the old arms were
feeling  pretty tired by the time we reached the top of the
climb; an excellent  route though. We continued on the upper
amphitheatre wall by way of  Pinnacle Wall, a hard Severe which
seemed quite easy by comparison  with what had gone before.    

10 February 1985.

	The popularity of the series of evening moonlight  walks led
me to organise an all night moonlight walk. It seemed  however
that this had much less appeal, and only Bryden Allen, Ben 
Hodges, a friend of Ben's called Alan set off with me from Edale 
shortly before midnight. After leaving the Maynard Arms at
closing  time we had parked at Grindleford station and caught the
last train to  Edale. As we headed up towards Ringing Roger there
was ample light for  walking, with a little snow underfoot. The
air seemed exceptionally  clear as we left the twinkling lights
of the village far below. Once  over the edge of the Kinder
plateau we experienced a very cold  northerly wind. In the clear
well lit conditions there were no  navigational problems and we
headed briskly for Crookstone Knoll and  Win Hill; it was so
bracing (brr!). At Yorkshire Bridge we paused for  a snack and a
warming drink from thermos flasks before continuing over  Stanage
and down the Burbage valley back to the start. The plan had  been
to arrive at Grindleford Cafe in time for a nice greasy 
breakfast, but we had been going so well that the establishment
was  unfortunately not yet open; so we headed for our beds in
Sheffield  just as the city was awakening.    

25 January 1985.

	This must rate as a perfect winter day in the  mountains:
bright, sunny, clear, with no wind and thus seeming quite  warm,
and with excellent neve for cramponning. The occasion was the 
club's annual meet based on the George Starkey hut in Patterdale.
As  usual the meet was very well attended - by more than 40. I
was in a  party with John Barnard, Frank and Jennifer Mellor,
Andrew Hindmoor,  Mark Robinson and Simon Cook. Once we reached
Striding Edge we donned  crampons and kept them on for the rest
of the day. Our route took us  along the Edge, before taking part
in a mass Castle ascent of  Nethermost Gully en route to
Helvellyn. As usual the summit was like  Picadilly Circus as we
sat eating our lunch and enjoying the  incredible views: the
Lakeland peaks all around, Galloway to the north  across the
Solway Firth, Cross Fell and the Pennines to the east, and  the
unmistakable shape of Ingleborough further south. Our afternoon 
route took us on a perambulation of Raise, Stybarrow Dodd, Watson 
Dood, Greenside and Hartside; we paused to photograph the sunset
from  the latter before reluctantly heading down to the lead mine
and thence  to Glenridding by the light of the full moon. We
could have downed a  pint or two but neither pub in the village
was open so we returned to  the hut for tea and toast in front of
that lovely open fire.       

23 February 1986.

	One of Jack Ashcroft's famous walks; on this  occasion even
the connoisseurs of such events were thin on the ground,  there
being just three of us, Jack, Nick Steen and myself, who set off 
from Edale on a day with bright intervals but a biting NE wind.
Jack's  concept was to approximately follow a straight line
between Grindslow  Knoll and Langsett. Snow conditions were
highly variable: icy  breakable crust many places, deep soft snow
drifts in others. I opted  for cross country skis which although
they were put on and off many  times throughout the day, on
balance probably saved time and certainly  saved energy; the
other two walked, and broke a lot of breakable  crust. The going
was slow but steady up Golden Clough and over Kinder  to
Blackden; up Alport valley and over Alport Castles to West End;
via  Slippery Stones and on to Cut Gate for the final section to
Langsett.  Somehow a navigational error was committed and we
dropped down the  Ewden Valley instead, and it was quite dark by
the time we reached the  road. The mistake was a blessing in
disguise as it shortened  considerably the road walk into
Stocksbridge to catch the bus back to  Sheffield. First however
it was good to warm up in front of a roaring  fire and quench our
thirsts in the cosy little pub at Midhopestones.    

13 March 1988.

	This was a classic bogtrotting walk in miserable 
conditions. The meet leader Rob Green had guaranteed "rain, wind, 
sleet plus knee deep mud". He didn't actually come on the meet,
but  the five masochists who did turn up at Hagg Farm for this
circuit of  the Alport and Ashop valleys, namely Jack Ashcroft,
Dave Pendlebury,  Jane Alexander, Gordon Riley and I, were able
to confirm the  prediction. The wind and rain were in our faces
as we headed past  Alport Castles and on towards Bleaklow.
Compasses were soon needed as  we climbed into the low cloud. Up
and along the Stake Line - extremely  soft going through the
groughs, we arrived at Bleaklow Head and Wain  Stones where we
snatched a quick bite of lunch in far from perfect  conditions.
Along the Pennine Way to Snake Top (in bog above up to our  knees
at one point) and onwards squelchily to Mill Hill, a rather 
tedious section. The rain had now turned to snow and as we turned
the  corner, the wind seemed to go round too so that it was still
blowing  in our faces. Down to Ashop head and up on to Kinder.
Gone, alas, the  hard frozen conditions experienced on the
moonlight walk a few days  earlier. Now we had soft fresh snow
lying on top of soft fresh bog. We  continued wearily past
Fairbrook and Seal Stones and it became clear  that we would not
reach Crookstone Knoll before darkness, as planned,  so we
decided to drop down to Blackden Clough. At least we were now 
out of the clag and could put away the compass. A leap over the 
swollen brook and we were soon back at the road just as it was
getting  dark. Quite a nasty bogtrot really, as bogtrots go.     

Traverse of the Cuillin Ridge, Skye - 1975
by Andy Smith

	We roused ourselves from our brief but comfortable bivouac
on the  Bealach a' Garbh Coire, the pale dawn heralding a perfect
Skye day.  Way below us to the east we could see that remote and
magical spot  below the fine peak of Sgurr nan Stri where the
River Coruisk flows  into Loch Scavaig; to the south the Small
Isles, Soay, Canna, Rhum and  Eigg, were visible across the calm
Hebridean Sea, with the fascinating  and shapely peaks of Rhum in
particular attracting the attention.    It was 3.45 am on Tuesday
27 May 1975, the occasion being the club's  spring bank holiday
meet to the Black Cuillin (and the party  comprising Ronnie
Hindmoor, John and Lesley Evans, Sean Jennings,  Andrew
Hothersall, Martin Coggins, Anne Pendlebury and myself). We had 
left Glenbrittle at eight o'clock the previous evening and
scrambled  up Sron na Ciche via Collie's Route, reaching the top
in time to see a  gorgeous sunset; later we had romped along the
crest of the ridge in  bright moonlight, reaching its
southernmost peak, Gars Bheinn, before  heading back to our
bivouac site. Now with the stars fading rapidly we  packed our
sacks and climbed to the top of Sgurr Dubh na da Bheinn  where,
having warmed ourselves up and reached a superb viewpoint, we
paused for  breakfast. Ahead of us the jagged crest of the Main
Ridge encircled  the head of Coruisk to its final peak and our
ultimate objective for  the day - Sgurr nan Gillean, a long day's
scrambling away but  tantalisingly close across the coire.    We
soon reached the famous Thearlaich Dubh gap, the first and most 
difficult rock pitch of the day; we abseiled into the gap, the
pitch was well lead, and the rest of us thrutched up one way or
another - it was  polished and strenuous, taking close on an hour
to get our party of  eight across. We left sacks whilst detouring
slightly from the main  ridge to take in Skye's highest point,
the paramount Sgurr Alasdair  (3257 ft). The next section, around
Coire Lagan, is possibly the  finest stretch of the whole trip:
Sgurr Thearlaich, an abseil down to  Bealach Mhic Coinnich, the
surprising Collie's Ledge to Sgurr Mhic  Coinnich, and the
magnificent scramble over An Stac, culminating in  the unique
Inaccessible Pinnacle. We soloed up the moderate but very 
exposed east ridge and abseiled down the short west face. It was
now  11am and getting very hot; time for lunch.    The next
section of the ridge is sustained, brilliant scrambling: 
Banachdich, Thormaid, Ghreadaidh, Mhadaidh, Bidean Druim nan
Rambh, An  Caisteal, Bhairnich, Bruach na Frithe; the roll call
of evocative  gaelic names familiar to every Skye afficionado.
Each Munro has a  number of tops which all have to be visited,
and even on a clear day  route finding is not straightforward in
places; it must be very tricky  in mist, compounded by the
occurrence of magnetic rock to confuse the  compass. We were now
beginning to get tired and dehydrated. It well  known that there
is no water on the ridge, and we were carrying large  water
bottles, but on such a hot windless day supplies of liquid 
dwindled rapidly. Fortunately there were still a few snow patches 
lingering from the winter to provide us with welcome supply of
cool  meltwater; otherwise we might well have had to give up. The
Bhasteir  Tooth is usually done via Naismith's route, an easy but
very exposed  pitch and the last place on the ridge where a rope
is needed.  Unfortunately when we arrived, a large army party was
having a  prolonged abseiling epic on the route, so we
circumnavigated it by  dropping into the Fionn Coire to the
north.    We arrived at the final peak, Sgurr nan Gillean at
7.30 pm, nearly  eighteen hours (including the bivouac) after
leaving Gars Bheinn, not  a bad time considering the size of the
party and the sweltering  conditions; it was only now just
beginning to cool off. After staying  together all along the
ridge, we now split up, with some wanting to  hurry down to the
Sligachan to ensure a pint, and the aesthetes among  us
preferring to linger and enjoy a perfect evening in the hills, 
chatting, admiring and photographing the views, and consuming the
last  remnants of food from our rucksacks (in my case I remember
a can of  sardines). At last we reluctantly left the top and
wearily set out on  the seemingly interminable track back to
Sligachan, reaching it just  before 11pm, 27 hours after leaving
Glenbrittle: 21 peaks, many of  them Munros, 15 miles in
distance, and at least 10000 ft of ascent, of  the roughest,
wildest mountaineering Scotland has to offer. It was my  longest
day out in the British mountains - and the best!  



