Mountaineer's Lunch

                             by Andy Smith

It is interesting to note the variety of victuals which club
members take from their rucksacks when it's time for the day's
lunch break. This is after all a matter of both great
individuality and importance, whether it's a picnic taken on a
warm grassy ledge surrounded by superb mountain views after a
satifying climb or a hastily grabbed snack to revive flagging
spirits and muscles when fighting the elements in a winter
mountain blizzard. I am referring here to what mountaineers
choose from preference when on their home ground; when abroad
local availability may mean dictate the rations carried, be it
French bread, cheese and garlic sausage, or chapatis and yak's
milk, or trail mix, Hershey bars and 7-up, or pemmican and cocoa,
depending on the continent.

When I started climbing (a few years ago now) the staple diet on
the hill was sardines and Kendal mint cake, both now rather out
of favour. Of course you never remembered to take a fork for the
sardines so your fingers smelled fishy for the rest of the day.
And the mint cake -horrible sickly stuff; I don't know whether
they still do, but the wrappers used to boast a long list of
expeditions supplied, and one brand proudly displayed a quote,
from Ed Hilary?, during the first ascent of Everest about sitting
on the snow admiring the views and munching mint cake.

Apart from adherents of the school of thought which reckons to
get through the day on a Mars bar or two (together with what they
can scrounge), most folks opt for sandwiches or variations on the
theme. In my days of low budget university mountaineering club
trips, the standard bulk buy for the weekend used to consist of
lots of large white sliced loaves, margarine and cheap tasteless
jam -cheap but filling, leaving more cash to spend in the pub.
Another common practice is to take left overs from the party the
night before- quiches perhaps, or even ratatouille for those that
way inclined.

For afters, oranges are traditional, so that the peel can be used
to decorate the area around the summit cairn. Special occasions
may suggest a change of diet; I well remember sitting with Rosy
in the snow on the unusually deserted summit of Scafell Pike one
Christmas day, and tucking into cold roast turkey, plum pudding,
and beautifully chilled white wine. When it comes to drinks,
there is less scope for variety, with squash and pop and pure
mountain stream water (natural or dead sheep flavours available)
being popular in the summer; tea,coffee and soup are fine for
winter, and thermos flasks have meant a decline in the practice
of routinely carrying a stove in your rucksack for a brew-up. One
reads of traditional concoctions such as "Mummery's blood"
(Bovril laced with rum) but these are rarely consumed in
practice; however a small hip flask of whisky or brandy can be a
very welcome accompaniment to a winter expedition.

Finally my personal favourite: a large pork pie, smothered with
English mustard (Colman's do a handy tube for picnic use), a
slice of flapjack, and a crisp apple, all washed down by a can of
Ward's Sheffield bitter.

