This was written by Ashley Turner in 1971. - Andy Smith 
 
                   THE FOUNDATIONS OF 'THE CASTLE'
 
                         Nothing to breathe but air, 
                         Quick as a flash 'tis gone; 
                         Nowhere to fall but off, 
                         Nowhere to stand but on. 
 
	Until Easter 1967 the regulars at the Castle Inn on
Twentywell Road  had never appreciated Ben King's verse and most
certainly never been  higher than eight pints on a Saturday
night. They were amazed when  they discovered that an unknown
bearded gentleman from north of the  border had enticed four of
their company to torture themselves in  desolate Glencoe for a
whole weekend. However, that was the start of  the Castle
Mountaineering Club which is in some ways unique in this 
country.

	Another weekend in Glencoe was arranged later in the summer
supported  by visits to many local edges almost every week. Great
interest had  been aroused keenly supported by Frank and Anne
Gilbody, landlord and  lady of the Castle. The bearded gentleman
from over the border was  identified as Alec Barclay, a former
secretary of the Junior  Mountaineering Club of Scotland, and his
ideas for forming a new club  were received with interest.    

	During September 19657 there was a meeting of nine strong at
147,  Dobbin Hill which voted unanimously in favour of forming a
club. The  title and H.Q. were automatically The Castle, a
committee was elected  and a constitution was authorised on 9th
October at the first A.G.M.  The very first meeting made the
decision which has ensured success  where others have failed -
the club should be a mountaineering club  and not just a climbing
club. Besides climbing it had to encompass  walking, skiing,
touring, and even just talking. The constitution  reads 'the
objects of the club shall be to foster the love of  mountains, to
afford opportunities to its Members of acquiring  knowledge of
all aspects of climbing and mountaineering technique'.   
Membership has steadily increased to over sixty. The organised
meet  list is very comprehensive, offering a local meet every
week and a  week-end away in Wales, Lake District or Scotland
every month.  Frequent lectures and slide shows are arranged and
of course there is  an open night at the Club Room every
Thursday. The importance of a  social programme has always been
appreciated, and Members and guests  have enjoyed dances, dinners
and treasure hunts.

	In July 1969 representatives from the Castle and four other
clubs met  to form the Sheffield Association of Climbing Clubs.
The Peak Climbing  Club, the Parnassus Climbing Club, the Central
Mountain Group, and the  University Climbing Club being the other
founding members. The  Association's aim is to form a liaison
between clubs and generally  promote interest in mountaineering. 
	Since the very early days one of the Castle's main hopes was
to occupy  its own clubroom. It took almost two years of
frustrated search before  an old outbuilding was spotted behind
the Rising Sun on Abbey  Lane.  Ada Bennett the landlady, and
Bass Charrington brewrey were extremely  helpful and
co-operative, and so a home had been found. The club was 
fortunate to have an architect in its membership and an ambitious 
conversion project began in 1970. On 21st April 1971 Sir Jack
Longland  officially opened the Club Room, a very fine tribute to
both the hard  labour of many members and the useful donations of
cash and materials  from several outside sources. The next
project is to construct an  artificial climbing wall within the
premises, and work will begin very  shortly.

	The foundations of the Castle Mountaineering Club are now
firmly laid  so that the club can build an interesting and
progressive future. It  already possesses unique features while
its ideas and plans are  extensive. The Club Room door is open
every Thursday evening and  visitors are always very welcome.

Snippets from the Archives
by Andy Smith

	The secretary's archives currently consist of past
correspondence,  minutes of committee and annual general
meetings, membership  application forms, copies of past
newsletters, meets lists etc; in  some cases these date back to
the early days of club. (There are also  various files on SACC,
BMC, huts and accommodation, etc.) I have been  browsing through
these documents; much of the material is of somwhat  ephemeral
interest, I have jotted done a few brief items below which  may
provide information about the atmosphere, issues and activities
in  the club in former years.

[To the editor: If you use any of this stuff at all, you might
want to  intersperse brief items between other articles, rather
than use them  en bloc. - Andy.]

	In his January 1970 newletter Alec Barclay chides members
for their  sloth "Regrettably, Sunday morning meets have not been
as well  attended as last year and the usual turnout of 6-8
members reflects a  fair amount of lethargy on the part of the
members. If the will to get  up and go out becomes too much of an
effort surely the reasons for  remaining a member become invalid.
One can only hope that enough of  you made New Year Resolutions
to crawl out of bed on Sunday  mornings...". A membership list
published in the same issue shows 37  ordinary members and 4
honorary members. Thus the turnouts at these  poorly attended
meets, as a percentage of total membership, compare  favourably
with many meets held these days.    In April 1970 Club ties were
available, in maroon or dark blue, at a  price of #1 1s 6d. There
had earlier been a competition to select the  best logo for the
tie.

	A club song book was in the course of preparation in mid
1970. I  wonder what happened to it.

	The first of a series of instructional meets was held on
Birchen Edge  on 14 June 1970.    In 1970 the Christmas dinner
dance, held at the Hathersage Inn, cost  36 shillings (#1.80) per
head. Club Christmas cards were produced the  same year.

	In September 1971 the Club promoted a highly successful
public lecture  by Don Whillans on the International Everest
Expedition at the City  Hall.    The completion of the climbing
wall was announced in January 1973,  after much hard work by club
members, and to celebrate this and the  completion of all the
building work at the clubroom, a Grand Party was  held on 26
April. Guests included Sir Jack Longland who officially  opened
the clubroom and climbing wall (and who was subsequently  elected
an honarary member of the club), representatives of the  brewery
and other organisations who had made the clubroom possible or 
helped the club in various ways, representatives of other clubs,
and  the press.    A regular practice about this time, since
fallen into disuse, was to  hold a preview of the area of an away
meet, at the clubroom the  preceding Thursday.

	When I joined the club in 1973, the Hon Sec at that time,
Mike  Jackson, very efficiently wrote enclosing (1) a membership
card (2)  the current meet list (3) papers on "Exposure" and
"Rope Technique and  Safety on Rock" (4) an Accident procedure
card (5) a paper on "Use of  the Clubroom" (6) the Club
constitution and (7) the latest newsletter.

	In his November 1976 newsletter Alan Fowler, then Hon Sec,
wrote:  "Apart from successful meets, the long hot summer seems
to have had  other effects. Lesley Evans and Jenny Perry are
expecting babies, and  after starting club weddings with Kate's
and mine next January, Sean  Jennings and Mel Hothersall and
Martin Coggins and Dorne Sharp have  now got engaged."   
Consternation was caused in 1977 by the Rising Sun landlady, Ada 
Bennett, insisting that the club change its meeting night to
Monday,  far less suitable than Thursday for planning weekend
climbing  activities. There was much discussion about a likely
drop in  membership and whether to move to a different meeting
place on  Thursday evenings, but in the end club night became
Monday for just  over a year until Ada retired.

	The traditional and very popular Cairngorms meet which was
held every  February for many years based on the Coylumbridge
Hotel was  discontinued after 1978, owing to escalating hotel
prices and  consequent declining attendance.

The issue of whether the club should admit minors was debated at 
length in committee meetings and AGMs in 1978-80. It was decided
that  16-18 year olds should be eligible for associate
membership.    1981 saw the debut of club sweatshirts, grey or
navy with a red castle  - now something of a collector's item.   

	The early eighties saw a conderable amount of necessary work
being  done on the clubroom roof: rebuilding the chimney,
weatherproofing the  ridge, treating the roof timbers for
woodworm, etc. These jobs were  carried out over a number of
summer Saturdays by willing volunteers.  


