Cairngorm Plateau Traverse.


An annual highlight of the CMC was the Winter visit to the
Cairngorms, for many members the first experience of the
magnificent snow©scapes and near©arctic conditions to be enjoyed
(or endured) in Scotland during the Winter months. A particular
outing on these hills in February 1970 proved to be on  of the
outstanding days on an early CMC Cairngorm meet and at the same
time illustrated very well the conditions one may reasonably
expect to meet in Winter in the Highlands. Our party consisted of
Mike Anderson, Jack Ashcroft, Chris Taylor, Paul Goodlad, Dick
Arnold and myself and our objective was to traverse the great
plateau from Cairngorm to Ben Macdui and back.

	The early morning was beautifully clear under a blue sky and
with deep snow everywhere. I regret to record that certain
members were aided in varying degrees by the chairlift in their
initial ascent of Cairngorm. I myself had to endure an
uncomfortable "stitch" but the glorious views were ample
compensation. As we descended from the summit to the West, we
could pick a column of walkers on the plateau below, resembling a
trail of ants and giving a wonderful sense of scale to the scene.
The vista ahead of Cairn Toul, Braearich and Sgoran Dubh Mor was
particularly splendid and there was a magnificent view across to
Fiacaill Ridge and the neighbouring cliffs plastered in brilliant
white snow with huge cornices. The going was fairly arduous as
the snow was not sufficiently frozen to take our weight and we
were constantly sinking in up to our knees and beyond. We made
our way to the Corran Bothy near Feith Buidhe (a bothy later
demolished following a tragedy hereabouts when a number of
children perished in the snows) only to find it completely
covered by snowdrifts except for the yellow cowl on the chimney
which stuck out grotesquely above the snow. There was a really
breathtaking view across to Breariach with its great corries
gouged out of the plateau and all completely snow covered under
the cloudless pale blue sky. We walked up to the summit of Ben
Macdui over the subsidiary North Top and then enjoyed further
wonderful views, particularly across to Cairn Toul and the peaks
beyond it and down to Carn a'Mhaim and the great snow©filled
trench of the Dee as far as Beinn a'Ghlo well to the South. The
Devil's Point, a spectacular great peak when seen from the Lairig
Ghru track coming in from the South, appeared far below as a
minor protuberance in this great Winter landscape below our
elevated position.

	It was then that my personal troubles really started as I
became very ill and had to retire urgently behind snow©covered
boulders. The "stitch" I had suffered most of the way to Macdui
suddenly became much worse and on the return journey I had
trouble walking any distance without stopping for breath. To make
matters worse, the wind began to increase and great black clouds
were approaching from the North©West. The weather closed in
rapidly and the spindrift combined with falling snow in the mist
to form near "white©out" conditions. Before long I was reduced to
walking a few yards at a time and later I was able to think only
as far as the next step in the deep snow. Some of the party had
gone ahead but fortunately for me, Paul and Dick stayed behind
and were able to help me along. I had never before felt so weak
and ill on any mountain trip and I was deeply and genuinely
grateful to my good friends for their assistance. Without them,
my predicament would have been very serious indeed. The last
small ascent to the top of Fiacaill a'Choire Chais seemed never
ending but we could descend the ridge until we emerged from the
mist and snow to look down on the ridge to a hive of activity on
the ski slopes below. Within a few yards we had left the howling
winds and generally adverse conditions on the plateau and after
descending a few hundred feet it was impossible to imagine the
violence of the wind and lashing snow which had made our return
so difficult. It remained only to stagger down to the ski©lift
and safety.

	 All walkers undertaking this traverse would do well to bear
in mind the remoteness of Ben Macdui (even in these days of
chairlifts on Cairngorm) and the sudden changes of weather often
experienced in these great hills. I have never forgotten the
great contrast between our glorious sunny walk to Ben Macdui in
such wonderfully clear conditions and that return journey on
which my personal discomforts and the adverse weather conditions
combined to create a real nightmare. The views we had enjoyed
throughout the morning of these great snow©covered mountains hadbeen outstanding under a clear Winter blue sky, but the day ended
with gales, spindrift, dense mist and snowfall © a combination of
the elements among the most difficult and dangerous we learn to
face on our beautiful yet challenging mountains.

Michael Jackson.


