My First Himalayan Adventure.
Nanda Devi Sanctuary © September, October 1977.

	The Nanda Devi Sanctuary is situated in the Garwhal Himalaya
about 200 miles North East of Delhi, 20 miles from the border
with Tibet and 50 miles from the Western end of Nepal. Within the
Sanctuary and linked to its Eastern rim is Nanda devi (the
"Goddess Nanda") and India's highest summit. In the days of the
British Empire it was also the highest mountain in the Empire and
the area has long been of particular interest to British
mountaineers.

	The Sanctuary comprises of a ring of mountains seventy miles
in circumference, minimum height 17,000 ft., the average height
being about 20,000 ft. and with no fewer than 19 peaks over
21,000 ft, it is some 240 square miles in area and drained by the
Rishiganga which breaks through the rim on the West in a
stupendous gorge. For about 50 years surveyors, explorers and
climbers including W.W. Graham, Longstaff, Bruce, Rutledge,
Wilson and Somervell were unable to penetrate the "Inner
Sanctuary" either over the rim or at the point where the
Rishiganga breaks through the ridges coming down from Maiktoli
and Changabang. It was in 1934 that Eric Shipton and Bill Tilman
with three Sherpa porters managed to force a route through the
gorge at this point into the "Inner Sanctuary" and in 1936 Tilman
and N.E.Odell reached the summit of Nanda Devi itself.

	There was a lot of climbing activity in the Garwhal area
generally in the 1920's and 1930's, Bill Murray's Scottish
Himalayan Expedition were there in 1950, but the whole area was
virtually closed to foreigners from the Chinese invasion of India
in 1962 until 1976, except for joint expeditions including Indian
members. One of these was Chris Bonnington's party which made the
first ascent of the vast white granite dome of Changabang
(6,846m) approaching from the Ramani Glacier, over Shipton's col
to the Changabang Glacier and then via the narrow east ridge.

	After that and before our visit there had been only a
limited number of other climbing expeditions into the "Inner
Sanctuary" and for the last few years access has been restricted
for conservation reasons © the local nomadic shepherds had found
another high level route into the "Inner Sanctuary", were
overgrazing an jeopardising the burral (wild blue himalayan
sheep) and other animals.

	For me it all began when the telephone rang one evening in
October 1976. A friend at the other end asked "Would you like to
join us on a trip to the Himalaya?" The immediate answer was of
course "YES". The concept was for a small lightweight party to
trek into the Nanda Devi Sanctuary and possibly "have a look at"
one or more of the peaks.

	Originally it was to be a mixed bunch of four "middle aged"
friends from other climbing and skiing trips: Donald an
architect, Hamish a writer and ex©teacher, Stephen a physicist
and myself , but we thought it was a good idea to have a Doctor
in the party so Frank joined us and later two younger members,
Peter a computer expert and Ian an engineer, joined in, making a
total of seven. We had intended to go in the pre©monsoon period
but during the preparations learned that there was usually a
short period of more settled weather post©monsoon and before the
onset of Winter. We changed our plans so that we could do the
nine day trek into the Sanctuary as the monsoon faded and have
good weather whilst we were up there.

	We split the party and travelled out to Delhi on different
dates, so as not to be too much of a burden on our hosts there
whilst completing formalities, purchasing provisions, paraffin,
etc. The first group took the "Musoorie Express" and their
purchases up to Hardwar and then went on by local train to Rishi
Kesh and bus up to Joshimath. Ian stayed on in Delhi to meet
Stephen, Frank and me on our arrival, we completed the shopping
there, made a day trip to Agra to see the famous Taj Mahal
erected in 1632©53 and then the four of followed up to Joshimath.
The others had rented a Motel room and a base where they could
leave gear whilst they went off on a week's acclimatization trek
up the Bhyunder Valley © "The Valley of the Flowers" visited by
Frank Smythe in 1937. We followed on a four day trek, camping in
the meadows at 10,000 ft. and climbing to the Sikh temple at
Hemkund at 14,000 ft. Unfortunately we were rather late to see
their flowers at their best, like us, they were being battered by
the monsoon rains.

	The whole party assembled back at our Motel room where we
spent the next three days purchasing rice, flour, ghee,
vegetables, etc. locally, making everything up into approximately
56lb. porter loads and arrangements for a lorry from Joshimath to
Lata, which we shared with a five member Australian expedition
heading for Changabang. There was a shortage of porters and we
had to use a herd of goats, each carrying about 22 lbs. in
panniers, in addition to 32 porters.

	The trek proper started on September 10th. and half an hour
after leaving the roadside we were in the headman's house in the
village of Lata drinking rakshi, staggering out two hours later
and then climbing up a steep track up the wooded hillside to our
first "Tilman Stage" campsite, using the actual platforms
levelled by Shipton and Tilman when they found this route into
the Sanctuary 43 years previously.

	The route crosses the Dharansi Pass at 15,400 ft., descends
to a lovely wooded alp at Dibrugheta and then traverses high
above the Rishi Gorge. It was from here that we caught our first
glimpse of "The Mountain Goddess" as the clouds parted for a few
minutes.

	Deodi campsite was reached after crossing the Rishi Ganga on
a rickety bridge and there the porters made a sacrificial
offering of a goat, which was cooked over a wood fire and then
eaten for supper that night.

	Our next camp site was at Ramani at the foot of the gorge
forming the entrance to the "Inner Sanctuary". The goats had to
return from here as the next obstacle was a 1,500 ft. high almost
vertical damp cliff covered with loose vegetation, which we found
quite difficult and intimidating and shortly after that the
famous "Tilman Slabs", fortunately with a fixed rope across left
by a large Japanese party who had gone up 10 days previously, as
there was a drop of about 1400 ft. into the Rishi Gorge below.

	From Tilchaunani campsite we had magnificent views of Nanda
Devi, 25,695 ft., Nanda Devi East, 24,391 ft., the peaks on the
Sanctuary rim, the confluence of the rivers which we had to cross
dividing the South and North Inner Sanctuaries and the area near
the snout of the Changabang Glacier where we hoped to make our
Base Camp.

	We rigged ropes from boulders and a pulley system to get
porters, loads and ourselves over the first river torrent at the
bottom of a deep ravine. The porters refused to cross the second
river as we had to wade through almost waist deep glacier melt
water with only a hand line across for support, so we paid them
off and ferried the loads over ourselves. It was a very cold and
tired team that camped alongside the river that night.

	The following day we walked up the valley on soft springing
turf with ever changing and exciting views of the surrounding
glaciers and peaks and set up Base Camp in an absolutely idyllic
position at 14,000 ft., with abundant supplies of juniper wood
and a fresh water spring, alongside the Uttar Rishi glacier at
the foot of the North Ridge of Nanda Devi, which rose 11,000 ft.
above us.

	For the next four weeks we went out singly or in groups of
two or three, for periods of up to  four or five days, exploring
the Inner Sanctuary, crossing the glaciers and camping in some
absolutely enchanting positions, returning to base camp for a
rest and to pick up more provisions for our next trip.

	All too soon, as Stephen and I were packing our sacks for
another four day trek, the first porters returned to carry out
for us,  three days earlier than we had arranged, because they
expected a change in the weather. The others agreed that Stephen
and I should complete our plans and said they would sort things
out with porters.

	When we got back to base camp there was only one tent and
two porters there, all the others had left for Joshimath three
days earlier! The four of followed next morning, there was a
light covering of snow which enhanced the Autumn colours, but on
the steep shaded sides of the ravines and gorge made the route
finding and the going very much more difficult. Late in the
afternoon our porters refused to go any further and we were
forced to build a stone platform for one two man tent into which
the four of us squeezed.

	Next morning we realised how right the porters had been, on
the next section there was still snow lying on extremely steep
grassy and rock slopes where a slip would have resulted in a fall
of at least 15,00 ft. We descended with the utmost caution, the
porters frequently calling for a rope which gave only a
psychological belay as it was impossible to drive an axe into the
frozen ground and there were seldom suitable rocks for belays.

	At Ramani campsite an upset billy can of tea water scalded
Stephen's foot, but fortunately after my first aid treatment, he
was able to continue the walk out the next morning.

	We camped again at Dibrugheta and reached Lata the following
day, tired and hungry but elated at having completed one of the
most interesting and challenging treks one is likely to find in a
lifetimes walking.

	The journey by Indian public transport back to Delhi was
only slightly less interesting and challenging. There we were
briefly reunited with the rest of the party before flying home.
Although the Sanctuary is at the present time a "forbidden area"
there are lots of other beautiful, interesting and remote places
to visit in the Garwhal Himalaya.

Charles Knowles.
