The Siege of Clachaig Gully
by
Alan Fowler

     On one of the earliest Glencoe meets the sun actually shone
on both the Saturday and the Sunday. Faced with the long drive
home that night a group of us looked for a climb which didn't
involve a long approach and decided on Clachaig Gully. We packed
up and were about to start out from Lagangarbh when someone asked
what we had in mind.

	"Clachaig Gully. That sounds like a good idea. Mind if I
come along?"

     By the time we had set off from the pub car park the numbers
had swollen to about twelve and it had all the makings of a good
epic. I can't remember all the names but Mike Anderson, Ashley
Turner and Dick Arnold were definitely among the team.

     The early pitches went well and we made rapid progress
despite the numbers. Then we came to the cave pitch; Mike led
this and I followed. No one else felt like leading it so, sitting
on the little saddle at the top of the pitch, I began top roping
people and lowering them down the other side of the ledge where
they could unrope and walk into the bed of the gully. It was
pleasant enough sitting in the sunshine and when the last man was
up I swung down to the ledge, coiled the rope and walked up the
gully fully expecting to find a top rope on the next pitch.

     What greeted me was a very glum circle of people. "Your
pitch," said Mike, before I could object. This was the famous
Jericho Wall, slightly overhanging and totally immersed in
dripping water. The first attempts all ended in failure which was
only slightly frustrating compared to the added annoyance of
giving my arm pits a wash with the water that streamed down my
shirt sleeves. The problem was getting a foot on a small incut
hold about eight feet up, the slime covered walls below offered
no positive foothold to gain enough height and what hand holds
there may have been were similarly slippery.

     The thought of benightment or reversing down the route was
totally out of the question so, rummaging in my sack, I dragged
out my secret weapon. A peg! This placed at head height gave me
enough pull to gain the foothold; the holds above were now within
reach and the rest of the wall was easier.

   Back into the gully the rope was dropped and the rest of the
team began their ascent. About half the team were up when I heard
the clatter of equipment as another group reached the top of the
cave pitch. Then the distinctive twang of a Glasgow accent
drifted up. If they found us using pegs on their route there
would be a lynching.

	"Get that peg hammer out quick, the Scots are coming," I
shouted down. Two taps of the hammer and the evidence of our
transgression was removed. The fear that the echoing reports
would be overheard sent the last members of the team scrambling
up the rope hand over hand as if being prodded by a huge sabre.

    The Scots were left to climb the pitch by their own means,
this would at least give us enough time to implement our escape.
We were all convinced that if we carried on up the gully then
they would catch us, and "Stitch that Jimmy!" would be the
result. Following in the Castle's best traditions of tact,
diplomacy and self preservation, we ran out of the gully and
scrambled down to the waiting cars.



