Two Weeks Older, Years Wiser.
	Sitting in the warmth and comfort of my home,Alpine adven­ture seems very far away indeed. Knowing the tricks that memory
and time can play, on countless occasions in the Alps last
Summer, I told myself sternly and fiercely, often through hot
tears, "You will remember how evil this feels. You will remember
that it's sheer hell."

	I was very naive and unsuspecting when I left for the Alps
for the first time last July. Excited and apprehensive, yes, but
sure of myself. I knew the environment was dangerous but, after
all, I had prepared very carefully, I had trained, was as fit as
I had ever been in my life, had good safe equipment and was to be
coached through my first Alpine experiences by a professional
guide. I was looking forward to it very much.

	I travelled out a few days early so had some time to spare
before I was due to join the guide. The campsite at Argentiere
was a lively, British climbing community and those days were
easily filled walking and climbing with new friends and getting
used to the Alpine scale of things. With two people from the Red
Rope MC I climbed the Papillons Ridge in fine conditions,
thoroughly enjoying the stunning positions and interesting rock
climbing. The altitude caused no problems, neither did other
first experiences, like climbing with my rucksack and long
abseils. We had a long walk off the mountain because we missed
the last telepherique down to Chamonix but it was a delightful
walk along green paths, eating wild raspberries and listening to
booming rock music echoing up from a concert in the town below.
It was a sound and optimistic beginning.

	My guide was Brede Arkless, the only British woman qualified
as a guide, well respected and with a great deal of experience of
Alpine courses. She worked with Tim, a good, strong climber who
also knew the Alps well. The two people in the group with me the
first week were a married couple, Karen and Kevin, who had walked
in the Alps before but had little climbing experience. The second
week we were joined by two men with a burning ambition to reach
the summit of Mont Blanc, nothing else, just that. John and Ron
had virtually no experience of any climbing and I had never set
foot in the mountains on snow or ice before. A challenge to the
sturdiest of teachers, I would say! Little did we know what Brede
and fate had in store for us.

	We began our training on the Mer de Glace. Those of you who
are familiar with Chamonix will know there is a perfectly good
train which takes you (and hundreds of tourists) to Montenvers,
only a short walk from the glacier. But for us walking was not to
be shirked. What's more, I foolishly wore my new plastic boots ©
personal torture chambers which pull you down with every step and
slowly pot roast your feet. By the time we reached the glacier,
with the boots, a rucksack that was far too heavy, the steepness
of the hill and dehydration, I thought I was going to die. It was
a sensation I was going to get used to . Donning crampons for the
first time, I felt about ten months old, learning to walk again.
Small, tentative steps, scowling at Brede when she shouted at me
to jump around. Then, to practice, we walked unroped around the
glacier, picking our way over crevasse bridges, up and down
slopes © very very slowly. Fear seemed to have stolen my sense of
balance. We stopped to do some rope work and learn safety
techniques, including crevasse rescue. One by one we played
rescuer and rescued. Weighing much less than the others, it
seemed at times that my legs and back would snap. I moaned, a
lot.

	I was encouraged that for the next couple of days we were to
leave the ice and turn to rock. We did two long routes on the
Massif des Aiguilles Rouges, bivvying overnight at the Index
station. At this time there was very little snow and the normally
snow covered gullies were full of hot, broken rocks which took
you sliding back as you tried to make upwards progress. Soul
destroying. Back breaking. Painful. The rock climbing was sweet
release, technically easy and in fine weather. At the end of the
rope I was left to my own devices and I enjoyed the marvelous
views and some relaxation.

	Following on this, on our fourth day, we set off for the
snow, planning to do the Aiguille Petite Verte on the way to the
Argentiere hut. Unfortunately I was struck with altitude sickness
on the ascent and had to be left sitting on a rock in the hot sun
watching enviously as the others went on up to their first "snow"
summit. The sickness became worse and I made the arduous trek to
the hut feeling only semi©conscious and in need of a great deal
of support. Staying in the hut brought more new experiences, a
whole new regime. There was so much to remember, like getting
water for the next day in case the pipes froze overnight and
arranging your gear so that nothing was forgotten or lost. I was
thrown onto a permanent state of panic. At 3am, a gentle whistle
roused our dormitory and bleary eyed, we prepared for the day. It
took us 40 minutes and Brede was furious © we would have to
manage in a third of the time in future. So, late, we set off for
the Aiguille Tour Noir. Before long, unable to keep up and still
feeling sick and dismal, I lost sight of the others. I had come
to the Alps hoping to learn to love the mountains and I was
beginning to hate them. Once again I was left behind, in pitch
darkness and freezing cold this time, waiting for dawn so that I
could safely return to the hut and all the while wondering if I
could afford the air fare home. I felt a mixture of disappoint­ment, frustration, anger and fear. But if I thought that Brede
would let me off that lightly I was wrong. The next day she
marshalled us out swiftly © I think I slept in everything except
my glacier cream and did without a drink or visit to the toilet
to be ready in time and after much faltering, cajoling, complain­ing and encouraging, by mid morning I had reached the summit of
the Aiguille D'Argentiere. What an enormous sense of relief and
achievement. I didn't want to go home any more.

	The elements decided to intervene and we had two days of
continuous torrential rain, which meant one day's rest and one
day in a flood on the Bossons glacier, trying to front point up
the steep sides of crevasses as water poured down sleeves,
gloves, trousers, socks and lightning cracked round us. Only when
we had achieved what we had come for were we allowed to retreat
to the Bar Nationale. At the car on my way down I incurred
Brede's wrath and a new reputation by removing all my clothes on
the roadside. Dry clothes seemed worth any consequences.

	We spent the next night at the Albert Premier hut and
although a snow storm delayed our start we conquered the West and
South summits of the Aiguille de Tour. After a great day rock
climbing at Les Gaillands, which reminded me of home and restored
some confidence, we set off for our last expedition. We were to
do part of the Midi-Plan, bivi in the Midi station and do a final
route on the morning we were due to travel home. Quite a schedu­le. We had to leave Chamonix by noon.

	There had been extremely heavy snowfalls up high © the
Papillons ridge I had rock climbed only days before was covered
in snow. With hindsight we should not have attempted the MidiªPlan in those conditions, with deep snow blocking the normal
route. We soon ran into trouble, confronted with difficult,
technical rock climbing in full ice gear. It was a traumatic and
dangerous time, ending in an abseil escape and retreat to the
Midi station. This experience played a large part in my choice of
route for the next day. Brede was to take half or the group on
the Cosmiques Ridge, while Tim would do Mont Blanc de Tacul. I
had no desire to repeat the events of the Midi©Plan and was very
keen to climb over 4000m so I chose to go with Tim. We had a
magnificent meal in our comfortable bivi and enjoyed a superb
sunset. Spirits were high.
	 At 3am Tim, Ron and I set off, leaving the others sleeping.
The ascent was marvelous. By this time I was beginning to get fit
enough and we progressed quickly, leaving two parties from
Cardiff University in our wake. Despite the deep new snow we were
on the summit before 7am, accompanied by a very spectacular dawn.
I felt on top of the world. Beginning our descent, we passed the
other British groups and reached the top of the main slab.
Imagine making your way gingerly down a narrow ice ledge,
balanced on crampon points and ice axe, expectantly working your
way towards the safety of the snow slope. And then....... that
slope moves, lifts itself from the face of the earth and hurls
down the mountainside. Half a mile of snow, at least 20ft deep
suddenly erupting, causing a thunderous roar. Nothing in the path
of that avalanche which would have survived. It was a monster. A
monster no more than 50ft away. Tim screamed at us and literally
dragged Ron and myself back up the ice ledge away from the chaos
beside us. I have never, ever been so frightened.

	But the trauma had only just begun. How were we to get off
this mountain? As we stood debating the horrific options with the
other groups who had reached us by this time, a French policeman
was dropped from a helicopter. His interest, understandably, was
to discover if there had been anyone on the slab. Miraculously
there had not. He offered no advice on our descent © we were the
mountaineers he said, we should tell him. He would be willing to
pick up our bodies if we risked triggering another avalanche on
the cracked and unstable slab, but alive he was not interested.
Fortunately common sense prevailed. It had been the largest
avalanche of the Summer there and to have to deal with nine
British bodies would have been inconvenient. So, the helicopter
came back and in circumstances that seemed more appropriate to
the television screen, we were whisked from the mountain top to
the valley.

	The weird helicopter flight which seemed to turn the world
upside down and the sight of rescue workers  and dogs on the
slope of broken piles of snow brought home the awful reality of
it all and I cried and cried. We should have been dead. Hesitat­ing on the summit for a final photograph, stopping to adjust my
crampon, moving so slowly on that ledge © the reasons we hadn't
been swept away came back to us in the sudden realization of what
might have been. We had to walk from the Vallee Blanche back to
the Midi station, interrupted mid way by another policeman,
dropped from a helicopter with more questions. Brede and the
others, who knew we had reached the summit as they had watched
our head torches in the early morning, had witnessed the whole
affair but could not know we were safe until we arrived back.
Their relief was as great as ours.

	I was glad to say goodbye to the Alps. They had been hostile
and frightening for much of my time there. I had felt bullied and
lonely and longed for the security of the Peak District, my home
and friends. Without Brede's pressure I would undoubtedly have
given in many times to physical discomfort and cowardice. As it
was we got an incredible amount done in the time available and
despite the aggressive conditions I had learnt and achieved more
than I had thought possible © about climbing, the mountains and
most of all myself, what I am capable of and what my true
limitations are. For the future I know I must be stronger,
fitter, more determined and self reliant to survive in themountains, and even then it will still be hard. I have just
finished reading "The White Spider" which chronicles the savage
history of the North Face of the Eiger. In spite of my experiences in the Alps I felt inspired and challenged by those awesome
tales, not intimidated and frightened. Perhaps those tricks of
time and memory have won after all. Or perhaps that's the magic
of mountaineering.

Claire Coates.


