A Cautionary Winters Tale
 
	The Club Easter Meet in Glenshee 1978. Base camp was
established at our now traditional wild camp site by the Clunie
Water on the Braemar side of the Cairnwell. Good Friday saw
Harry, Charles, Anne, Jenny and myself crammed into the Maxi with
packs and camping for four days. The car was left in the ski car
park and a note, according to official recommendations,
containing details of party and destination was left at the
ticket office - the official Mountain Rescue Centre. Full packs
struggled up the chair lift and we were off to Loch Vrotachan.
Anne appeared somewhat nervous and apprehensive - she said it was
because she hadn't done much skiing, but in retrospect I suspect
it was well justified apprehension at the thought of spending
three nights with Harry and Charles. The weather worsened as we
skinned  up to Carn a Gheoidh, and by Loch nan Eun spindrift was
hurtling across the frozen lochan. Hardly a suitable campsite!
Dropping to the north we found enough shelter by a peat hag to
sort gear and pitch camp. The peat was rock hard so the tent was
anchored only to pegs buried in snow and well trampled.  Water
was found at the bottom of an 8 foot deep pot hole of snow  with
rather delicate access.  Two parties disappeared to their tents
and emerged only when driven by overwhelming natural necessity.
Gales and snow swept around all night, occasionally interrupted
by  mysterious muffled interruptions from the next camp. Even a
cry of help would not get us out tonight. Meanwhile unbeknown to
us, back in civilization, police forces in five counties were
mobilizing their forces.  Morning, the tent had survived and so
had Anne. A sunny start had us doing the Beinn Iutharns but we
were soon back in clag, and Charles was having problems with the
new high-tech sticky skins which had taken a dislike to the cold
weather. Gales rose again at night and rising above were
intermittent muffled screams from the next tent. We pulled the
hoods of our ducks over our heads and pretended not to hear. By
morning the tent had shrunk to half its size as the weight of
snow pressed in on us. Charles and Harry assured us that Anne was
alright, she was less sure. Four of us skinned up to Carn an Righ
followed by Charles towing his skinless skis - he'd make a good
doggie-walker. A superb run down in powder snow to Gleann Mor
made it all worthwhile. Back at camp, the bags were getting damp
and by next morning only the tips of the tent poles were visible.
With some difficulty the pegs were unburied and with full packs
again we had a great ski down to the Baddoch Burn, then a last
skin up to Loch Vrotachan and we joined the crowds on the
Cairnwell run. The car was still there, but Anne was convinced
someone had been through her handbag but not taken the money -
three nights with Harry and Charles does take a little getting
over. Mugs of coffee in the cafe and we heard that Sheffield had
been cut off from the world, airports closed and the Glenshee
Mountain Rescue called out. Well it had been a bit wild. 
 
	 A little later I wandered over to the counter to report our
safe return. "Er, yes, er just a, er, minute" said the lad, and
disappeared to return with the manager and Leader of the Mountain
Rescue Team. Over the next few weeks the story was pieced
together. By 9 pm the white Maxi had stood in splendid isolation
in the middle of the empty car park. The police were informed and
the car number dispatched for the Swansea computer to work on.
Meanwhile back at base Kate and Al had arrived and were settling
for the night. Kate was rudely disturbed from a privy squat by
powerful torches, Land Rovers and the full might of the Braemar
police force. Somewhat shaken by this disturbance Kate was
interrogated about the whereabouts of the Kime party. The officer
did not react very kindly when told that these malingerers were
camping in the hills . Meanwhile two mountain rescue teams had
assembled and the ski tows were in operation to search for lost
skiers. The Swansea computer had informed the Braemar and
Sheffield constabularies of the identity of the owner of the
Maxi. At Hallamshire Close the house was empty and the neighbours
knocked up for questioning - "Oh. they're camping in Scotland
somewhere", "Yes, we've just found their car - nothing but an old
pair of Wellington boots in it and a ladies handbag". Leaving our
neighbour to the vision of their eccentric neighbours barefoot on
the mountain the officers departed. An hour later our neighbours
phoned West Bar when they remembered where Jenny's father worked.
Across the Pennines, the University night porter was awoken from
his duties and questioned as to the whereabouts of the Professor
of Engineering. Lancaster Constabulary found his house empty.
"He's in Scotland" said the neighbours "at the cottage".  No way
were the Inverness Constabulary in Fort William going to drive
two hours to this address at this time of night, a phone call to
their local contact would suffice. Campbell Morrison was dragged
from behind the bar at the Clan to drive three miles, wake up a
Professor and bring him to the phone. "They're camping in the
hills and they know what they're doing. Call your rescue off!".
The message got back to Braemar and all teams were stood down.
The Braemar police on returning home stopped by again to rouse
Kate and Al to tell them in no uncertain terms that Dr. Kime was
to report to the police station IMMEDIATELY he got back.

	Next morning the staff were back  at work at the ski centre
and as the ticket office opened the lad put his hand in his
pocket, "Och, Hamish, a laddie left me this note yesterd.....".
As Hamish said "The lads dealt with him - he won't forget again
in a hurry". Back to base camp in the Glen to find our tent had
disappeared, and then found, the shreds neatly folded and packed
in Charle's tent. Kate and Al returned from a day of ticking and
passed on the message. Down to Braemar - "My names Kime, I
believe you want to question me in connection with...", " Och,
that fiasco on Friday, come on in". Somewhere in all this there
must me a moral, about parked cars, and  leaving  notes to the 
police, and rescue teams called out unnecessarily, and of
training and certificates. And of the freedom to roam the hills
unhindered and to  take responsibility for ones own safety and
actions?  
 
 
							Dave Kime

