A Little Ridge Walk
 
	Hotel Windamere.  The bus had dropped us on the road below
on a cold, dark November night. The hotel lounge with upright
piano, coal fire and photo albums of the guests enjoying
Christmas parties , the walls covered with prints of the local
mountains . Morning, the promised spectacular view of the
mountains ,  obscured by the all too familiar swirling clouds.
Breakfast - soggy cornflakes, greasy  egg and bacon, abysmal
coffee . Excellent tea - not surprising for this was Darjeeling.
Such was the start of the lightweight expedition heading for the
south ridge of Kanchenjunga. Top priority - one Sherpa
(lightweight and low cost). Tourist office, Darjeeling - all
available porters already taken by commercial trekking groups but
"No problem" - window thrown open and shout of "Oieaa you" in
best Nepali brought in a weatherbeaten hillman - just the image
we wanted, accompanied by a rather less beaten and younger
character. Our hillman unfortunately already booked but brother
was 'very good man'. With some misgivings he was hired - Sherpas
after all are  a hardy race and appearances misleading.
Rendez-vous arranged for the evening to sort loads and our
employee to arrange Land-Rover transport to the start of the
climb. Shopping for six days - lentils and several one kilogram
packets of chilli and curry powder. 
 
	 Trusty sherpa arrived, neatly dressed -  sports jacket,
tie, polished town shoes together with what might generously be
called a large day pack. Appearances can be misleading . They
were next morning - 6.30 am,  two rather scruffy westerners in
sweaters, jeans and boots  bearing enormous packs (containing
sleeping bags and all the light gear) led by a neatly dressed
Sherpa with a tiny pack containing 2 litres of kerosene, primus,
lentils, billies and all the other heavy items available. Well,
at least he could speak the local language - pity he didn't speak
English as well. At least we had a guide - the map indicated we
might need one - 4 miles to the inch, photographically enlarged
to the familiar 1" scale but with 500' contours and sheer drops
of 2500' as the aerial surveys went through a height warp. By
Land-Rover to the first police check point and then set down at
the end of our ridge which formed the India-Nepal frontier. Evening  - 3000' higher up the ridge at Tonglu (10902') - a
luxury bungalow with double room and private bathroom with
shower. Pity it wasn't on mains water and the nearest supply was
200 yards away. Pity the beds hadn't seen sheets for forty years.
Pity about the broken windows. Attempts to initiate Sherpa Dawa
to the mysteries of a primus were hastily abandoned when we
realised the locality and equipment of the nearest fire-fighting
service - we never did learn what he thought of our curries and
dehydrated packets, but he happily preferred the left-overs to
our morning meusli. Sunset in the mountains and the luxury of
soft duck down and yellow foam on damp beds - the hardy sherpa
curled up in the semi-glazed conservatory - hardy souls can sleep
anywhere, and next morning he said he had slept soundly. Two days
later he admitted that he had been up since 4 am for fear of
freezing stiff and had shivered til sunrise. 
 
	High peaks still in cloud  but the ridge was clear. Sbon met
up with a party of  four  Indians from Calcutta (37 in the shade
last week) with two porters carrying their enormous packs topped
by blankets and rolled mattresses - none of those little yellow
rolls for them . They too were walking to Sandakphu which was the
furthest point to which tourists usually went and still
accessible by Land-Rover. Sandakphu and a search for the warden
to open the youth hostel for us - he'd lost the key but appeared
with a crow bar to lever off the padlock.  Bought a pile of
firewood. Then it snowed. The Calcuttans initially enthralled by
this white powder, then draped themselves in three blankets each,
then retired to the fire and continued to shiver. They bought
more firewood. Then our Sherpa disappeared for a while and
returned repeating "Phalut no good", we shrugged this off and he
disappeared again for several hours. The Calcuttans bought more
firewood. The US cavalry passed through - the trekking group had
found it too much and had hitched rides. The Indian army passed
through - looking very efficient. A long time later Dawa
reappeared " Schentleman he shay Phalut no good - musht come shee
him". An Indian mutiny was imminent.  Schentleman - the smart
Indian army officer - gently pointed out what was already
blindingly obvious, we couldn't go further in six inches of snow
and a continuing blizzard with a man in sports jacket and tie -
even if he was a Sherpa.

	Morning  and still snowing - a group of sickly worried
Indians shaking their heads by the Land - Rovers which brought
their customers up to the hotel. "Too dangerous go down, sahib" -
the Maxi wouldn't hesitate in far worse Sheffield winter
conditions. Well perhaps it would have if its' tyres were as bald
and frayed as those of the Land Rovers. Back to the hostel (no
charge, no duties) and shivering Calcuttans and mutinous Sherpa.
Plans rapidly re-arranged, Dawa loaded with all the heavier
unwanted equipment and sent down to the valley to await us in two
days at Ramam while we continued to our high point at Phalut,  at
the Sikkim frontier which barred our way up the remaining few
thousand feet to the summit. The Calcuttans bought yet more
firewood. In cagoules and glad of good boots, but feeling the
weight of our packs at 12000'  we continued up the ridge. How
right to come so well equipped for mountain weather! Met half a
dozen natives on the path, also using equipment proven by years
of daily usage. Baskets as large as our packs but full of
potatoes and supported by a single head strap, light shirts and
bare feet. Might we be overdressed?  13 miles of slush and rain
along the ridge to Phalut. Tourist bungalow a heap of ruins and
the youth hostel commandeered by the Indian Army. Looked like
camping. The officer looked at Jenny and dismissed any such
ideas. We could sleep with the army! Passport checked (upside
down) and pronounced in order. Interrogation on a vital matter -
one or two Land Rovers at Sandakphu check point. We hadn't really
noticed, perhaps we would if we'd been stationed at Phalut for
six months, were awaiting relief from the winter shift and snow
was threatening to cut us off for another six months from the
family. The last two bunks cleared for us and the evening spent
learning useful Nepali words - firewood, kerosene,  1st,
2nd...9th 10th sons etc. No wonder we'd had a mutiny - firewood
was fetched from below the tree-line a thousand feet below and
fires were tiny. By the 10th son it was bedtime. We peeked at
Kanchenjunga by moonlight - the only view we ever had. Hardy
soldiers filled their hot water bottles - we snuggled into the
down. Hosts not happy - felt our bags and muttered - six heavy
blankets dumped on each of us - our Nepali not up to explaining
principles of insulation. We slept well, knowing  we were safe
with the army, its four rifles stacked at the foot of our bunk,
ready to protect us against the Chinese hordes. 
 
	 Morning, beautiful sunrise, but no summit views. Across in
forbidden Sikkim prayer flags fluttered on the peak of Singalila
at around 12,000' - would be nice to nip up there before dropping
to the valley - perhaps a word with the guards? No problem! A
quick hello to the first peak in Sikkim, then back to Phalut and
down, down, down to the deep forest 5000 feet below. Only one
path down, but we saw no-one - God Help us if we'd taken the
wrong turn in this. A wide well-frequented path  in the valley,
but still no sign of Ramam and our rendezvous with our Sherpa and
loads. Stopped local - in three piece suit and briefcase.
"Ramam?" said we pointing ahead of us. "Ramam!" said he pointing
ahead of him. Followed, retracing steps for half-mile. The suit
stopped and pointed up the bank beside the path - looked no
different to anywhere else. From a few yards up a village
appeared from which an enormous grin bounded towards us, tore of
Jenny's pack and led us to the youth hostel. Our Sherpa was
pleased to see us. Signed the hostel book and paid (1© p total). 
 
	 Cloudless skies next day, tips of white peaks barely
visible. Typical! Rice fields, corn fields, yak trains, pony
trains, sugar cane chewing kiddies, smoking chimneyless roofs,
tangerines, sacks on backs, baskets on backs. And so to Jhepi at
5000 ft. Camp on the football field. Tonight we entertain the
locals. Teacher kept the infant population at regulation  six
feet - magic noise and flashes of primus - mystery strangers in
space capsule. A nightcap of cardamon flavoured milk was offered
by a friendly local. Our 'interpreter' vanished to the village
but was back for his breakfast curry-leftovers. Down to the
metropolis of Bijanbari by 9 am for tea and Dawa had soon got a
Land Rover to take us on the precipitous road through the tea
plantation 5000 ft up to Darjeeling. "Take rickshaw" our Delhi
travel agent had said. Driver arrived 2 hours later and together
with 10 other passengers, driver and mate we were on our way -
for a while. Engine stalled, mate put on hand-brake (brick under
wheel - Rovers standard fitting inoperative). Battery dead. 2000
ft to bottom. Other Land Rovers hailed to help. Off again
eventually. Repeat procedure three more times before Darjeeling
and so home. Toy steam train at walking pace 6000 feet down to
the Bengal plain - racing trucks for mutual crossing  - visions
of the hidden notes in newspapers "Train derailed in India 700
dead". But "No problem" until 6 inches above Heathrow tarmac and
four jumbo engines roar back to life and we head to the sky
again. Just another 'near miss' - this is where the adventure
really is - it was eight hours on the tarmac on the way out for a
bomb scare! 

Dave Kime
