The Castle Wall.

    Indoor climbing walls have long provided both amusement and
bemusement to climbers and spectators alike. The Castle climbing
creation is no different in that respect but, due to its unique
location in the Clubroom, its frequency of use tends to reflect
certain phases of interest within the club. An increase in the
wall's popularity usually occurs at times when there is an influx
of new members or novices or when there is a strong climbing
contingency within the club.
      
	The climbing wall's construction and development in the
early seventies paved the way for the sudden burst of interest it
received between 1978 and 1981.  This was partly due to the
production of the first ever guide book of the outcrop and a
large enthusiastic climbing group within the club.

	Inter club competition reached a peak in 1980, and this is
reflected by the new routes section in the back of the guide
book, a good example being the route called The Merry Monk.  This
hotly denounced route was climbed by Tom Benson with the use of
an alleged hold that was out of bounds (half an inch to the
right!). It was quickly reclimbed without use of the offending
hold by Steve France who renamed it Short Black Curly Hair.
However, the arguments did not end there due to the rise of
serious ethical problems. Tom and Richard Staniforth, who both
attempted to "take the glory", were over six feet tall and could
easily reach past the crux move - much to the annoyance of Steve
who could not do it without making a ridiculously hard
intermediate move. After several weeks of contemptuous lip the
true claimant to the 14 inch of newly climbed rock was never
decided - but who cares anyway!


	Steve Hartland, as a reflection of the times, promptly free
climbed all the aid routes, and for entertainment Keith Naylor
thrust his person onto the rock to create Lunge or Plunge. The
route should have been named Lunge and Plunge, but it did however
allow a means of reaching the top using two foot holds and one
hand hold. If you think that sounds amazing then ponder over the
fact that The Crack was climbed from top to bottom using only one
hand jam! You are advised not to attempt this unless you are
proficient at mid-air jamming.

	The club supplies various items of equipment for members or
visitors wishing to climb on the wall, including ropes, helmets,
and various old pairs of rock boots. It is always stressed that
climbing is at one's own risk and the utmost care is required.

	The Castle must be one of the few clubs in Yorkshire which
has its own climbing wall - so why not use it and give it a go! 

	Please Note.... All climbs over HVS can only be climbed
wearing lurid coloured tights and headband but please remember
that the use of chalk is forbidden on all routes.

	Good Luck!

Steve France.
