Mike and Mark Anderson, Jack Ashcroft, Ronny and Andrew Hindmoor,
Mike and John Jackson, Sean Jennings, Charles Knowles, Ian
Lauriston, Frank and Jennifer Mellor, Bob Payne, Rosy Perkins,
Cyril Rusby, Anne Pendlebury, Andy Smith, Colin Tregoing, Vanda
Boyd.

Eastern Edges Walk.

	The main body of walkers assembled at the Flouch Inn at 8.30
am on a dry but overcast Sunday morning. An advance party
consisting of the youngsters and parents had left earlier to
allow shorter legs a little more time to negotiate the initial
boggy sections.

	The main party were soon heading up Cut Gate, though Jack
had to be restrained from ploughing over the eroded portion of
the path which was fenced off for restoration purposes. Once the
little notice had been read to him, and the possibility of
wardens lurking in the conifers had been pointed out, he agreed
to the recommended variation, though not without mutterings about
his preference for going straight up.

	The path was followed without further incident until Margery
Hill was attained. Jack now made amends for his previous
indiscretion by imparting a most valuable piece of information ©
namely that we were now standing on the highest ground in
Sheffield. Fortified by this gem and spiritually uplifted by the
generous manner in which it was given, we felt able to continue
to Featherbed Moss. In a state of euphoria we wandered Southwards
until Abbey Brook lay below us. It is unfortunate that as we
dithered on the brink, we were witnessed by the advance party,
who had taken the more conventional contouring path around the
head of the clough. Now was the time for individual variation as
a dozen people took nearly the same number of routes for Back
Tor. All arrived within minutes of each other and a welcome break
was taken by all 19 walkers now together for the first time. It
was generally agreed that the most tiring part of the walk was
over and, barring nuclear attack, success was assured. In fact
all that remained was to sit back and we would soon be at the
Robin Hood near Baslow.

	As time went by it became evident that a little stroll was
still necessary in order to achieve our objective and so we set
off down Derwent Edge. The view became increasingly more
interesting as we passed Wheel Stones, then down Highshaw Clough
and on to Moscar House.

	A short walk up the road, then we were striding away  from
the exhaust fumes toward Stanage. We took another break  near
High Neb since this was reckoned to be the half way point. Whilst
lunching we greeted a passing couple. The young lady returned our
felicitations, but her companion was heard to say, "It's the
Castle!" whereupon she was shepherded away along the Edge with
only an occasional backward glance. Shortly after this we met
Dave. Jenny Kime, who had walked up from the Robin Hood where
they had kindly deposited a car for our return. 

	From Stanage we chose to walk down the Green Drive under
Burbage rather then over Higgar Tor and thence into Longshaw
where we took a welcome tea break at the cafe. This proved very
refreshing and gave us a lift for the last leg. We were soon over
Froggatt in the gathering gloom, but there was a little stumbling
and grumbling as it got darker on Curbar Edge. Most people had
torches at the ready for the traverse of Baslow Edge and we found
Wellington Monument without much trouble. Jack attempted to rid
himself of some Grappa at this stage but with little success.
Judging by the response of those who were tempted, Jack will be
offering his bottle round for several years to come!

	It was drizzling now so we went at a fair pace down the
track to the crossroads and then made a rather rough crossing up
to Birchen Edge. The path there was a welcome sight and it was
followed easily down to The Robin Hood © which was shut! We had
taken 10 hours for the walk arriving a good half hour before
opening time. A vote of thanks was offered to Jack as we waited,
shivering in the cold evening.

	Congratulations to the youngsters who did very well indeed!
Reports that Mark Anderson was seen carrying his father down from
Birchens are as yet unconfirmed.

	Thanks to all those who for helped with the transport.
Thanks also to the Himalaya restaurant for the curry!


Frank Mellor.
