Sentimental Ramblings of an Early Club Member.

	The last time I visited the Castle Mountaineering Club
Clubroom was in August 1986, during a hectic trip to England to
pack belongings, put our house up for sale and say farewell to
our family and friends as we had decided to settle here in Norway
after a two year temporary contract. The reason we'd taken the
risk of a temporary appointment in the first place had, I
believe, much to do with the C.M.C. More than 20 years ago, only
a few months after the Club was founded, I became an official
paid up member (apart from honorary members,I believe Mike
Anderson and I are now the longest standing Club members) and
from that time my love for the hills and wild open spaces grew.
Hence the prospect of new hills and months of skiing was too
great to turn down.

	My experiences have ranged from early attempts at rock
climbing, being more or less hauled up "Diffs" on Froggatt, moist
struggles up "The Buachaille" from the warmth and (in those days)
squalor of Lagangarbh, suicidal snow ploughs in white©outs down
the White Lady on Cairngorm and dirty bog©trotting days on
Kinder, to classic climbs in Llanberis, back packing in the
remoter parts of the Scottish Highlands, Summer holidays in the
French Alps and now, the thrills and pleasure of Langrenn skiing
over mountains, through forests and even on the sea in a good
Winter, for several months of the year.

	I have no claims to great conquests, either on rock or hill.
I've never been one for wanting the highest, fastest or hardest
and my one attempt at outdoor competitiveness was a farce. This
was the first Edale Skyline Race and the late Don Morrison
cajoled me into entering ("You're fit", he said© I'd not run
anywhere for nearing 15 years and I was, in those days, a very
heavy smoker). I came in last (O.K., many had dropped out by the
wayside) and when I arrived back at Edale, everyone had packed up
and gone home. A voice from the darkness cried "Well done Kate,
you've come second in the ladies section." Well there were only
four to start with and two had dropped out! My only connection
with anything remotely organised on rock and hill is that I'd
decided to tackle the Munros: I had just reached a little over
half way with my Munroes when we emigrated to Norway (and I
haven't completely given up the idea of finishing them completely
one day). But even the ones I tackled were often attempted in a
very come©day go©day fashion. It was more a means of being
attracted into areas I may not otherwise have entered.

	Any "conquests" have been purely personal. A long, hard day
in the hills has been pleasurable for the hours spent in wild
scenery and possibly wilder weather, with C.M.C members. People
I've felt comfortable with, whose judgemednts I trust and respect
in difficult situations and with whom I've relaxed with later
over a pint. My rock climbing, by today's standards, has been
extremely humble (although in the early days, were still very
much in the minority and I've received a fair dose of leg pulling
and many strange remarks). I've lead the odd V.S. and a few
Severes but most of the time I've seconded. However, the
highlights, to me, have been days such as on Dinas Mot, when I
stood at the foot of Direct Route, my first long Welsh V.S. and
shivered in terror as I watched an International party of
climbers ready for their ascents on various routes. They all
seemed to know what they were about. They were all clad in smart
stretchy clothes and had chalk bags and confidence and I was
still behind the times with thick breeches and sweaty hands.
However, once my feet left terra firma all fear disappeared and
on the last pitch I belayed, sat in the sun and chatted to other
C.M.C. members on a nearby route, contented that I'd climbed the
route well and enjoyed every moment.

	My participation as a member of the C.M.C. has, as for many
others no doubt, altered over the years. In the early days of the
club I thrived on doing anything "en masse". Climbing was rarely
a quiet affair between leader and second, but more an invasion of
one climb by as many people as possible. I remembered vividly
Browns Eliminate on Froggatt being peppered with thrutching
bodies (mine being one), all being top roped at the same time. It
became like a kids puzzle of tracing back the rope to "which
leader". We even drove in convoy on away meets to Scotland ©
safety in numbers? Would the natives attack us? Over the years I
became more solitary and anti social in my forays into the hills.
Although, I still enjoyed the getting together with club members
at the end of the day. And now © well not much chance of joining
club meets often from this distance, but I have fantastic
memories of past ones.

	I would have liked to think my five year old son, Alisdair,
would also have years to grow with the C.M.C. We took him onto
Curbar Edge the very day he came out of the hospital where he was
born and I said to him "This is air, these are rocks and that
lump over there is Win Hill, I hope you'll learn to love 'em!" We
took him on several club meets before we, sadly, had to leave the
Sheffield area. However, these first impressions appear to have
stuck and he is now knowledgeable on nature and accepts walking
and the hills as a normal part of life; as he started was first
on skis shortly after his first birthday, is now sickeningly
competent.

	Over the years, through the C.M.C., I've made some very good
friends and now one of the greatest pleasures for Alan, Alisdair
and myself is to welcome friends here to Norway and enjoying our
fantastic scenery and many other varied outdoor activities (plus
sharing a lot of nostalgia over the duty frees they bring!)

	Well as I said at the beginning , my last visit to the
clubroom was almost two years ago. There were many new faces but
the atmosphere of a thriving and friendly C.M.C. has little
changed. I hope that all newer members and older ones alike can
look back, like me, after 20 years of C.M.C. membership and enjoy
as many wonderful memories and as many good friends as I have.

Kate Fowler (or Katie Peek to many).


