From Toothbrush to Sledgehammer.
                                                             
	The Winter of 1985/86 was the Castle Mountaineering Club's
biggest triumph - yet not many members know the true extent of
the clubs success. More new routes were claimed on one crag than
probably all the Castle first ascents put together.

	The secret Quarry is situated on the right , as you travel
up the road from Stoney Middleton and is accessed via a gate and
track which leads to the quarry base. The main wall which is
almost vertical extends some hundred feet in height to a huge
ledge which effectively splits the face forming an upper tier for
another fifty feet.

	When Steve France,Chris Wright and Ian French entered the
Horseshoe Quarry for the first time, the true potential of the
place was finally realised. Its loose and dangerous condition was
enough to put anyone off, but what was required was a bit of
vision and imagination and between the three of them there was
certainly that. The Big Question was, would they be wasting their
time developing an area which nobody would bother to visit ?
Only time will tell, but the first thing to do was clean the
place up and to make it worth coming to.

	It didn't take long to realise that any glory to be had
would not come cheap. At first the usual gardening equipment was
used - a wire brush, tooth brush, small trowel and a broddling
stick, but it didn't take long to realise that these tools were
vastly inadequate. Steve had started to clean a small ledge on
his first new route and after shovelling at least half a ton
(tonne) of rubble discovered he no longer had a small ledge but a
huge belay stance for about a dozen people. Furthermore, the
bigger the ledge got, the shorter the route became, as he slowly
filled up the quarry bottom with its debris. Steve later became
known as the Mad Axe Man due to his mean short pick-axe which he
used for levering off small flakes,boulders, in fact anything
that moved (or didn't! but that is another story).

   In the early days of development, huge amounts of rubble and
rock were detached in order to clean up the cliff face. This was
not just confined to routes but generally all over in a desperate
attempt to make the place safe and more appealing, apart from
that spoffing blocks happens to be bloody good fun. The biggest
trundle was a gigantic hanging pinnacle weighing at least five
tons, situated half way up the wall on the left hand side. Poised
ready to fall at any time, the mad axe©man picked away at its
footing like a masochistic dentist but alas failed in the
attempt. The next day, not to be outdone, the giant tooth was
attacked again but this time with a large pick and a six foot
long crowbar. The resulting "bavoooooom" must have been heard for
miles. Well worth the effort.

    The most controversial decision was the use of bolt
protection . Apart from an instinctive desire to live, bolts were
necessary due to the quarry's lack of natural fault lines - which
give very poor, if any runner placements. Even pegs were
bottoming after only an inch of penetration (sounds painful!).
By strategic placing, it was possible to cover a hundred feet
with only 4 bolts; these were pre-placed during the last stage of
the cleaning operation.

	The actual leading of the routes was (due to modern dayethics) done without practice or top rope - to make the ascent as
pure as possible.  Even this was not pure enough for Steve Ralph
who later amazed us all by his clean lead on sight policy.       
  

   Developing the upper tier also had its problems due to its
lack of abseil points at the top. So Chris and Steve had to
sledge hammer a series of belay stakes into the ground each day. 
They buried them under piles of stones to prevent others from
using them until the routes were claimed. The top was very
reminiscent of Millstone with its loose shale and grovelling
finishes, and so platforms were dug out of the sloping earth to
enable them and others to actually finish the route instead of
wondering if the protection was good whilst free falling! This
also had a second advantage in that it prevented a constant dustªfall down the rock face, previously inevitable whenever the wind
blew.

	As with the main face, there was plenty of loose rock to
detach on the top tier. Unfortunately it had a tendency to roll
over the lip of the main ledge and go crashing down the main wall
below. Although this was two for the price of one, everyone had
to know where everyone else was and anyone who decided to go on
walkabout, did so at their own risk.

   By the time of the New Year, Ian had finished four of the main
lines on the lower wall,including Megalithic Man and Ancient
Rhythm. Steve had completed his excavation of the ledge and named
the route  Nice face, Shame About the Ledge and Chris, who by now
had the misfortune to work for a living, had half cleaned a route
on the lower face but then decided to join Steve on developing 
the Upper tier with his eyes set on  Mr Blue Sky.

       All good things must come to an end and the word was
finally out, which brought visitors to the quarry. The self
indulgence of the cherry cake may have to be shared!             
                  
    The fun now began because many routes were cleaned but not
led - including the one Chris started cleaning earlier, and this
was the route which a particular group was eyeing up first! 
There was no time to lose, but Chris was at work and not
available until the weekend, so the honours went to Steve who
climbed the route and called it  Shot Yer Bolt .                 

     Not surprisingly Chris was displeased, so Steve gave him one
of his unclimbed cleaned routes as a peace offering -
subsequently named White Dove . During the next few weeks a spate
of ascents were completed , the pressure was reduced .

	Ian Barton and Steve Ralph now entered the quarry with the
promise from the trio that there were routes to be had,
especially at the lower end of the gradings. Ian wasn't impressed
but made a token gesture of several rock routes and an ice gully
at the back of the quarry. Unfortunately (or fortunately!) only
one of Ian's routes were attributed to him in the guide book,
Steve Ralph received the honours Instead .  In fact Steve R. was
"given" quite a few routes he knew nothing about due less to the
generosity of the new ascentionists but more their embarrassment
in owning up to them! This may be unfair to Steve R. but perhaps
because of to the loose, dirty, and dangerous routes which he
led, he asked for it!

There is a true report that a pair of French girls recently
visited the quarry and after no success in climbing the higher
grades, they were kindly directed towards the  Bimbo..  routes.
After struggling and cleaning for an hour and a half they finally
screamed "what a heap of shit" (In French) and walked away
feeling totally disillusioned with British Climbing.
    
    After four Months of digging the novelty finally wore off and
The very sight of a wire brush or shovel prompted a balk of
revulsion. Altogether there were 35 routes climbed by the Castle
with 16 of them being attributed to Steve Ralph?  As for the
original trio, they all succeeded in their secret desire to bag
their first 6b virgin ascent. With all the best lines gone, the
Castle left the quarry to the droves of scavengers that poured
into it. The potential for new routes was still as strong as
ever, although much of the remaining surface contained loose
rubbish. It was nice to see the interest that the quarry provoked
but in the long term it will probably suffer from enthusiastic
young leaders willing to climb anything however loose for the
sake of immortality.

    On visiting the quarry today you will usually find several
parties climbing there. The original vision by Ian, Steve and
Chris has finally reaped its reward. The rock dries exceptionally
quickly and coupled with the bolt protection makes it an ideal
crag for the Winter or wet. Unfortunately the routes of the lower
end of the scale tend to reflect the nick name Horseshit Quarry
but climbing 5b+ you will be pleasantly surprised and probably
knackered as well.   

Steve France.
