Introduction.

	Langdale 29th. September 1967, torrential rain and road
flooded in several places, the camp site very much the same, not
a very auspicious start for a new Club, but one that nevertheless
is still flourishing 21 years later.

	Many members have experienced the situation with the
addition of cold, hail, sleet and snow not to mention discomfort.
Now in this book it can be told as to where the blame lies.

	He came from across the border, to seek satisfaction for
causes long gone, at least that is what we put it down to when we
first went to Scotland to be tortured by long walks and hard
climbs.

	Alec Barclay and Colin Mackie took a small party of
Sheffielders for a weekend in Glencoe in March 1967, followed by
a further visit in July of the same year. It was after this meet
that the idea of forming a climbing club came to Alec.
Discussions at the Castle Inn on Twentywell Rd. met only with
enthusiasm and convinced Alec that he had a nucleus for the
formation of a club.

	At a meeting of nine strong arranged at Ashley and Avril
Turner's house for Monday 25th. September 1967 led, to the
founding of the club. All being drinkers at the Castle Inn it was
natural and appropriate to ask Frank Gilbody, the Land Lord, that
The Castle Inn, should give its name to the club. But what to
call it? Castle Climbing Club or the Castle Mountaineering Club.
After a long discussion it was decided to call it the castle
Mountaineering Club, interpreting this title as to put one foot
in front of the other to gain height, this it was felt would give
a wider scope to people joining the club.

	A proposal by Alec that the club should exist to foster the
spirit of mountaineering and the teaching of techniques was
agreed, as was the Castle should be our H.Q. until suitable club
premises could be found.

	A committee was elected and a constitution was authorised on
9th. October 1967.

THE FIRST STEP HAD BEEN TAKEN.

The Club.

	The club's success has surely been ensured by that first
meeting and the decision to call itself a Mountaineering Club.
This has enabled all members to foster their love for the
mountains, be it climbing, walking, skiing and pot holing (pot
holing that's a little difficult to put one foot in front of the
other and go down) but whatever the reason the club was to afford
opportunities to its members of acquiring knowledge of all
aspects of climbing and mountaineering techniques.

	To this end the club became something of a family with meets
in each others houses, slide shows and lectures organised at
local pubs and Sheffield University.

	With growing membership the need to find a club house became
and fulfill the Castle's main hope, to occupy its own clubroom
became apparent.

	It was in early July 1969 after about two years of
frustrating searching that Alec Barclay, Colin Mackie and Jim
Frost whilst having lunch in The Rising Sun in Abbey Lane and
discussing the club with Ada Bennet and her husband Henry, who at
that time were the licensees, became aware of the dilapidated
building at the rear of the pub.

	On looking at the rectangular building with its ivy covered
roof and old stonework it was apparent that there was great
potential, even if the door was falling off. Interest declared,
Ada was quite agreeable to the proposition, but informed us that
the final decision rested with the brewery which was Bass
Charrington and to get in touch with Mike Collins. 

	Mike's enthusiasm for the project was boundless in August
1969 Alec had talks with Jeff Huckerby the Tied Trade Director of
Bass Charrington and some of his works department.

	It was originally intended to use only the top half of the
The Club building which used to be the corn and hay loft, the underneath
being a bottled beer store and Henry's car park. On closer
inspection it was found that the upper floor joists and floor
boards had got worms and it was agreed that these would be
replaced.

	After a quick inspection the parties were glad to retire
quickly to more congenial surroundings in the bar of The Rising
Sun and discuss the matter further.

	Alec has always been known as a talkative type of person
(some call it verbal diarrhoea) but on this occasion it proved to
be a valuable asset. Alec would not stop talking and Jeff wanted
to get back to work, so it was agreed that the brewery would
strip out the whole of the interior of the building and make the
property good to the tune of #150.00.

	It was also agreed that the Castle Mountaineering Club
should then rent the premises at 10/© per week. By the end of
September 1969 the building was stripped and ready to start the
real work of reconstruction.

	It was unfortunate that at this time Alec's work took him
back to Scotland and so he was unable to take part in the
building of the Club, some say he did it on purpose knowing what
was in store, and at the same time, like all newly born there
were growing pains. A number of members felt that to move was
wrong and that the Castle Pub should still remain our H.Q. but
the die had been cast and a new era had begun.

	A home had been found and with Ada Bennet and an extremely
helpful Bass Charrington work was soon begun.

	The Club had an architect in its membership in Kerry
Brooksbank and the ambitious conversion project began in April
1970.

	The plan was to convert half the building into a snug with a room above for Club equipment and use the other half as a kind of
climbing wall. Little did we realise just what Kerry had in mind
for the work we were all about to get involved with. It was not
until he presented us with a line drawing that the full extent of
his ambitions dawned.

	The plan called for a raised floor for the snug room and a
stone centre column with stone steps embedded making a stone
staircase to the upper floor. The roof of the snug was to be of
new wood and varnished to enhance the appearance. A fitted
bookcase would not only house books, maps and climbing guides but
also from part of the galley, bench seating, carpets and lights
would finish the project.

	Having decided what to do it only remained to do it, easier
said than done. Where the funds, material and labour to come
from. The latter was easily solved as Club members would do the
work, the former not so easy. With the decision of having the
roof of the snug done in new wood we already had a large
expenditure, so of course scrounging and begging began. Mike
Jackson with his contacts knew of a bungalow in Rotherham about
to be demolished and we were given permission to take what we
needed.

	One evening a plague of locusts in the shape of Club members
descended on the property, and with the guidance of Kerry, floors
came up and joists came out, and most of all lead came off the
roof. This with the promotion of the premier of Whillans on
Everest 1971 (a scoop for the Club to say nothing of a gamble)
gave us the funds we urgently needed and helped to keep the
project well advanced.

	Mike Collins, again with his connections with the brewery,
told us they were taking up the old cobbled court yard which over
the generations had been tarred into place, and which the old
dray had driven over year in year out. As the yard came up so it
was delivered to the Rising Sun until in the end there was a pile
of stones a good three feet higher than he boundary wall, whichwas itself 10 ft. high.

	On that first day of work we gathered in the yard and a very
large pile of dirty tar encrusted stone greeted us. It was also
obvious that a good many generations of horses had passed over
them and left their deposits in more ways than one.

	We were under the impression that all we were going to do
was to cement them into place under Kerry's guidance, how could
we have been so gullible.

	Looking at the stone and then at us Kerry picked one up. It
was shaped somewhat like a loaf of bread, rounded at the top and
tapered on both sides, the top wearing face was slightly
fractured from the horses hooves and wagon wheels. Kerry turned
the stone round and struck a new face on the back with his hammer
and chisel. With a cry of "That's it," he stood grinning.

	"That's what," we responded in unison.

	"We face it all," replied Kerry.

	What was the man talking about, had he taken leave of his
senses, face it, all of it; just thinking about almost made us
walk off and leave him alone. He couldn't mean it, but he did. So
it started, every stone had to be cut revealing beautiful lines
and colours beneath. The stone proved to be of superb quality and
became a joy to work with, all 20 tons of it.

	Over the coming months members came and went to give a hand
but a hard core were to be seen on the site at all times,
including Stone Wall Jackson, Kate Peek, Alan Fowler, Terry
Parker and Chris Taylor to mention but a few. They were involved
in cutting the stone, building the column and laying the snug
floor. You could always tell the stone cutters by the large
bruises on their left hands where the lump hammer (see how
technical we became) missed the chisel. To cover the
embarrassment at our ineptitude we said they were hand jammingscars.

	Saturday, Sunday, Club nights and any spare time went into
building and slowly it began to look like the plan and take
shape. We were now becoming very professional, Kerry must have
thought so too, for as work progressed and then nearly came to an
end he kept coming up with another wall to be built or archway to
be made.

	The 100 year old ivy, previously allowed to go it own way,
covered the whole roof and gave us a different type of problem as
it was growing through the stone roof tiles. It had to be cut off
in small pieces so as not to dislodge them, but two large pieces
were kept which can now be seen in the Club room fireplace.

	Several corbel and feature stones were salvaged from a
Church demolition and sand blasted and used to support the two
main beams in the roof of the snug.

	All in all it was a busy time but like all things it came to
an end. With the snug floor down, the column built, the galley
finished and the upper floor in place all that remained were the
furnishings. These were scrounged from similar sources and went
to make the Club room all the more comfortable.

	On the 21st. April 1971 a grand opening party was held. Sir
Jack Longland officially opened the Club room, a fine tribute ti
the hard work of many members.

	With the work behind us and the Club officially opened we
looked forward to our first open night. However, we had not
expected what was in store, the growing pains were recurring and
the doubts of having made the move to the Rising Sun reªsurfaced. Had we done the right thing, was it going to be viable
as a Club or just a small circle of friends. It was a question we
were to ask ourselves again as on that first night a grand total
of eight turned up.

We were all still climbing and walking the hills but now
having families, building careers and starting businesses as
well. However, the membership slowly grew again and after about a
year the keen early stalwarts began to get itchy fingers again. 

	With the other half of the building empty a climbing wall
was needed to fill in those dark Winter nights. Designs were
prepared, developed and the stone masons and builders brought out
of retirement.

	We learnt that two cottages were being demolished above
Crookes. After negotiating for the stone we borrowed lorries and
a further 20 tons of large sandstone blocks were loaded,
delivered and unloaded by Club members in one day. This was the
only time we upset Ada when she found an enormous lorry in her
courtyard together with an equally enormous pile of stone.

	The working parties began again and the climbing wall was
the result. Great attention was given to detail with undercut
holds, hand jams and overhangs being constructed. If we did not
like a move we just filled it in. Together with a fire place this
gave us a true mantle shelf start to the main face.

	One area now left for improvement was the main entrance. A
stone grinding wheel donated by the Peak National Park was added
and Kate, busy as ever, carved out a second one in 1972 when the
final work was completed.

	April 26th. 1973, finished!

	No more stone to cut, no more fittings to fit and no more
painting to be done. Party time with a furkin of beer, a whole
range of goodies made by wives and girlfriends, this was a time
to celebrate. Sir Jack Longland came back as did the
representatives of the brewery, other Clubs, the Press and all
who had made the Club room possible. The night was long and one
to remember.

Over the years members have ben involved in the promotion of
a film in Sheffield, showing the local climbing and extending a
helping hand to the hard lads from London's East End who met
their match on the local gritstone Edges.

	Most of all it has been fun and the Club room exists for all
to enjoy others company in good surroundings. Throughout the
years the Club has seen many changes in climbing techniques from
the early days when we filed the threads out of nuts to the high
tech "Friends" of today. It is not unusual now to see a pair of
bright pink tights extending his or her style on the Club room
wall on a Thursday night, progress it would appear comes in many
styles.

	Progress too, for over these 21 years the Club Officers have
played their part in organising meet lists, arranging transport
and seeing to the smooth running of the Club. Even the Club's
news letter is now computerised, now that's progress.

	Members can be found in all parts of the world ranging from
Antarctica to the Himalaya, from Peru to Africa, a far cry from
those early days when going to Scotland was an adventure in
itself.

	With Alec in Scotland and starting a second Castle
Mountaineering Club (Scotland) (yes he's at it again) it only
remains from Kerry who moved to Johannesburg, Kate and Alan who
moved to Norway to do the same and we shall become world wide.

	The friendship and companionship of The Castle
Mountaineering Club is very special and as members have given
their efforts to the Club so the Club has brought together many
people from different walks of life to enjoy each others company,
climbing the hills and mountains.

	The foundations of the Castle Mountaineering Club are now
finally laid and with its unique features and enthusiasm of its
members its future is more than secured.



Mike Anderson.
