Island Flings.

Islands hold all sorts of fascinations for some © although
some more than others and I more than most. The Castle
Mountaineering Club has a climbing interest in the Scottish
Islands of Arran, Rhum and Skye and which islands therefore
feature frequently on the Club's Summer meets list. In my case a
keen interest in islands has become an obsessive urge to visit
ever remoter, wilder and far flung spots. I am, though, wary of
the D H Lawrence tale "The Man Who Loved Islands" in which the
subject of the tale, seeking ever smaller island sanctuaries,
finally retreats to a slab of rock from which he is swept clean
away.

My interest in islands began in Easter 1974 with a visit to
Arran. The trip involved leaving my then base of Reading at 5.00
pm on Maundy Thursday evening, a journey to Bristol to collect
one member of the team and a further journey to Stoke on Trent to
collect two other members followed by a run to Ardrossan and the
early morning ferry to Arran. The return was equally frantic and
saw me back at my desk at 9.00 am on Tuesday. In between, though,
was an experience of true island bliss © blue skies, anti
cyclonic weather, a snow capped Chir Mor and vistas of the West
coast of Scotland and the nearby  Paps of Jura. It was a three
day glimpse of paradise that started a permanent island
obsession.

Having whetted my appetite with the benign and accessible
beauty of Arran, I began looking for more demanding locations,
preferably those with mountaineering potential. A timely move to
Sheffield and membership of the Castle Mountaineering Club
certainly helped. Mull, Skye, Rhum and Jura became obvious
choices. Unfortunately, I arrived in Sheffield with too little
time at my new employment to have earned a week's holiday and
therefore felt obliged to remain South of the border while the
Club trip to Skye in May 1975 went ahead. That was the year Skye
wilted under a week long heat©wave and much serious climbing was
done including a Club traverse of the Cuillin Ridge. All I could
do was seethe with rage on learning what a trip I had missed.
The following Winter I learned that the Club was planning a
Spring Bank Holiday trip to Rhum, but I was again unable to join
the trip. Rather than miss out altogether I obtained permission
to camp on the Island at Easter and so got there in advance of
the main Club expedition. I shall never forget the feeling of
commitment at the sight of MacBrayne's ferry steaming away, while
we stepped ashore with only the tents and the food we had with us
to sustain us for the coming week. A week of gales, leaking tents
and wet sleeping bags took away some of the earlier gloss, but
the experience of watching deer only feet from our tent and an
ascent of Askival on the only day of brilliant sunshine with
views of the Cuillin on Skye, the nearby Small Isles and more
distant Outer Hebrides shimmering through the deep blue Minch,
easily compensated for the grimmer times. I was, though, left
with a slight "niggle" when the subsequent trip in the Spring
again found good weather and packed in the routes.

The Rhum experience led me to a series of small and remote
islands where the intrinsic interest of the island itself rather
than the mountaineering was the attraction. Thus it was that I
arrived green and seasick in North Haven on Fair Isle after two
hours tossing about in the sea on the Island's mail boat.
Ignoring the obvious mountaineering (and swimming!) challenge of
Sheep Rock I was enchanted by the peace, abundant wildlife and
the cheerful simplicity of the fifty or so human inhabitants.

Thoroughly "hooked" by now,  I spent a fortnight ploughing
the Hebridean waters helping as crew on a seven berth yacht.
Twice it was nearly all ended© firstly by a scrape with an
unexpected overhead power cable on the West coast of Lewis and
secondly by a navigational blunder that led us late at night into
an uncharted bay at the entrance to Stornoway harbour.

Through this island touring I developed an obsessive
interest in a small, remote and  hard to get to island group
beyond the Outer Hebrides. I mean of course "The Islands on the
Edge of the World" as they were once described or St. Kilda by
their present name. I first noted them with little more than idle
curiosity as dots on the map, but then I read and article in
"Climber" which aroused my interest. The description of the
highest sea cliff in Britain and the largest gannetry in the
world surrounded by Atlantic seas drew me to these Islands like a
magnet. The sad story of the former occupants of the Islands,
their fate at the hands of the Church and "civilization" and
their ultimate evacuation added human interest. However,  my
attempts at getting there were singularly unsuccessful. Twice the
Scottish National Trust rejected me as an applicant to join a
work party and an attempt to sail there by yacht had to be
abandoned in high seas.

The more my attempts to get there failed, the more I became
obsessed with the Islands and the more I redoubled my efforts to
find a way to traverse that elusive 45 miles of Atlantic ocean.

Eventually my patience and perseverance triumphed over all
else and I did duly set foot on the shore of Village Bay on
Hirta, the main Island. Here at last was a remote Island, well
out to sea, out of sight of land and a truly wild place. The
teeming sea bird life was ever present, the wind and sea pervaded
all nooks and crannies and the drama of the cliffs was mind
blowing. Yet amidst all this drama the old village and the old
graveyard peacefully enhanced the natural appeal of the Southern
sweep to  the sea of the Island's highest point, Connachair.

It was with a heavy heart that I bade farewell to these
lonely and spectacular islands and returned to mainland Scotland.
There have of course been other islands since and I have other
targets for the future, for example Foula, reputedly the St.
Kilda of the Shetlands. Perhaps, though, I should try elsewhere.
A glance at the shattered coastline of Norway looks promising
with gems like the Lofotens looking very appealling and
rekindling the old mountaineering spirit. Yet the lure of the
Scottish Isles is hard to shrug off and once again I shall find
myself setting off to the Hebrides. Although I shall be
trespassing rather close to the Corrievrecken whirlpool, there
are sufficient reasonably sized islands around to avoid my
resorting to slabs of rock and experiencing the  watery grave
warned of by Lawrence!

Mike Doyle.
