Long Walks
Peakland Trilogy.


Jack Ashcroft.
The Challenge of Mountain, Hill and Moorland.

The Marsden Ashbourne Walk 16-17 th. May 1981.

	It was the Hon. Sec's knees that did it - the Wasdale meet
at the end of June. It was then I thought, "I'll write up the
Marsden Ashbourne Walk."

	Janet and I were sitting on the summit of Scafell Pike when
who should arrive to join us from the Corridor Route but the Hon.
Sec. and team. As she stood before us with the glory of Borrowdale as a back cloth my eyes rested on her knees which were black
and blue with bruises. But what would you expect when she had
accomplished such routes as Moss Ghyll Grooves, High Man via
Jones Route Direct and Tophet Wall? A noble performance for a
weekend. But today © Sunday had burnt her off. Scrambled out of
Piers Ghyll halfway up. Didn't want to get her knees wet presuma­bly.

	Now enough of this caustic comment. Janet and I wandered off
to Lingmell whilst the Hon. Sec.'s party moved off for the last
fling of the weekend - Scafell via Broadstand. "That can be good
for the knees," me thought, and so the mind wandered further.
Broad Stand, debatably the first rock climb in the British Isles,
so I read somewhere, when Samuel Taylor Coleridge descended by
that route on a walking tour of the Lakes, and found great
hilarity in the hopeless situation he found himself in, neither
being able to move up or down. That was at the end of the
nineteenth century when I supposed you could say an angle of
inclination was established by "a man of letters" to establish a
rock climb! The walk which Coleridge found himself on and
unwittingly initiated the skill of cragsmanship has a lot to
answer for. Nowadays 125 mile walks are organised in the Lakes to
do in as near a day as possible; and as regards climbing standards,
we all know where they have gone to; equally as extreme as
125 miles in a day! But to the vast majority of mountaineering
club members in this country the just©above average walk and
climb is what enjoyable ...and so from Moss Ghyll to
the Marsden-Ashbourne Walk a few weeks previous.

	It's been a long standing ambition of mine to walk from
North to South of the Peak National Park, and I was pleased that
the Castle were prepared to include it on their meet list (albeit
in conflict with another event which I didn't know about  at the
time - but which some did!). However, the discussion on whether
to start on the Friday night, walk as far as possible and bivvy
went on a bit (Mellor and Ashcroft) in the event the wisest
decision was taken to start from Marsden on Saturday morning. It
lashed it down with rain over Friday night!

	Saturday 8.20am found Andy Smith, Frank and Jeniffer Mellor,
Tony and Grace Parkin, Ian Lauriston and myself walking along the
Wessenden Reservoir track having been conveyed to our starting
point by Janet Ashcroft and Rosie Perkins. Our route went over
Black Hill to Crowden Youth Hostel where we enjoyed our second
breakfast. We then walked over Bleaklow where strong words were
used on Ashcroft for missing out the delicacy of Wildboar Clough
and scrambling direct up the hillside to the East. "Speed is of
the essence" was the explanation. Lunch at Higher Shelf Stones
and then another controversial route, direct for the Edge over
Featherbed Top. It was then over Kinder Low to Chapel Gate where
we arrived about 5.20pm.

	The weather had been good throughout the day, and the
evening walk down Perry Dale, Dam Dale, Peter Dale and Monks Dale
was all very pleasant. It was punctuated with a jar at the
Devonshire Arms (Peak Forest) before meeting Rosie with support
camping gear at the Angler's Rest, Millers Dale, about 8.40pm. We
camped the night at Blackwell where we arrived in the dark,
rather tired at 10.30pm. We thought we'd arranged the campsite
the previous week and started to erect the tents, when the lady
from the farm appeared out of the gloom to doubt our presence.
"Are you Duke of Edinburgh?" she asked me. "Not tonight,
Josephine," I nearly said but was saved from embarrassment by the
eloquence of Ian who - just soothed the situation. And so to bed.

	Sunday we started at 8.20am and the day's walk via Parsley
Hay, Biggin Dale, Mill Dale, Dove Dale and Lin Dale to Ashbourne
was largely distinguished by our timing to arrive at the Waterloo
Inn, Biggin as it started to rain, and similarly at the cafe in
Milldale. We also were met by Margaret Anderson and Ronny
Hindmoor in Dove Dale who walked up Lin Dale with us. It was all
a fine day's walk. Fourteen hours walk the first day and eight
the second, all punctuated with multiple rests on the hill and in
hostelries. Try it some time. Or I think Frank's idea was the
best. "Next time it will be hike and bike for me". It can all be
fitted into a day with bikes left at Rushup Edge. Just the
C.M.C.C.T.C. next time!

Jack Ashcroft.

