A Peakland Ten Trigs Walk.

	The Peak District National Park does not lack information on
its network of footpaths, long distance walks, like the Derwent
Watershed and Peak Horseshoe; gentle walking days up to 15 miles,
staying at Youth Hostels, or walks for motorists and round walks
of a few miles or so. The walk I am going to describe is based on
10 Ordnance Survey Trigonometrical Points linked to see the best
of or at least most interesting parts of Kinder and Bleaklow. The
walk in fact avoids the wildest and remote areas of Bleaklow, in
the process of which an addition of ascent and descent is
followed by dropping into the Derwent and Snake (Woodlands)
valley rather than staying on the high moorland throughout as
walked with the Derwent Watershed or Kinder Round.

	The walk starts at Hathersage at the lane leading to the
Church and Scotsmans Pack and a route followed steeply to Trig
Point no. 1 1500ft at the Northern extremity of Stanage. The most
interesting way is probably over the fields towards Higgar Tor
and over the stile to Trig 1500ft. Follow Stanage Northwards over
High Neb to Trig. no.2 1502ft thence via the Moscar House path
across the moor to Derwent Edge and Wheel Stones. Follow the edge
path Salt Cellar, Dovestone Tor and Cakes of Bread to Trig no. 3
Back Tor at 1765ft. A route is then followed to Trig no. 4 at
Margery Hill (1791ft) either by dropping into Abbey Brook at the
site of the old shooting cabin and up again to Featherbed Moss or
around the head of Abbey Brook. From Margery Hill walk the mile
or so North West to include Outer Edge (1776ft) Trig Point no. 5
and then come back to cross the bridge at Slippery Stones via
Broomhead Clough and the site of the old Bullstones shooting
cabins. Slippery Stones marks the first part of the walk having
covered five of the Trig Points.

	Follow the path through the woods to the road head at
Ronksley South plantation and then along the road at the side of
Howden Reservoirs to the road head and the river Westend. A short
distance up the Westend path turn sharp left steeply through the
conifers to Alport Castles and the fine views across The Tower to
the Snake and Kinder Blackenden Edge. It is then a short descent
to Alport Castles Farm and along the track to the River Alport
confluence with the River Ashop near Sillott Hey.

	Cross the ford turn, right and follow the footpath to
Blackenden Brook Below Sean Hill, then steeply up Blackenden
Brook to Seal Edge on the Kinder (North) path. Follow the edge
past Chinese Wall to Fairbrook and make for Trig no. 6 (2048ft)
via the Edge. From Trig no. 6 walk to Kinder Downfall and along
the Pennine Way route to Trig no. 7, Kinder Low (2077ft). In
order to include Trig no. 8 it is necessary to retrace steps by
dropping down to Edale Cross and up to Brown Knoll, Trig no. 8
(1866ft) and then coming back to Edale Cross thence via the
Pagoda to Crowden Brook and along the Edale Moor path to the top
of Grindbrook Clough. Walk on along the edge past Upper Tor and
Nether Tor to Trig point no. 9 just to the North East of Ringing
Roger (1937ft). It then remains to steer a course via Madwomans
Stones and Crookstone Hill  to the Hope Cross and up over Wooler
Knoll to Trig no. 10, Win Hill (1516ft) affording views across
the Vale of Edale to "The Great Ridge", Mam Tor to Lose Hill and
beyond.

	It only remains to drop down via Thornhill to the Shatton
Road junction and follow the River Noe path to Hathersage by the
Plough Inn.

	The distance is some 43 miles and covers some of the finest
gritstone features of Derwent, Bleaklow and Kinder moors and
excellent views of the valleys Derwent, Snake and Edale and in
all of a 15 to 18 hour day.

	Hagg Farm Youth Hostel or the Snake Inn could provide
halfway overnight stay with variable routing in Alport Dale
including up and over Hope Forest and down Oyster Clough if
desired.


Jack Ashcroft.

